                                                   Do All Elliptic Curves of the Same
                                                   Order Have the Same Difficulty of
                                                              Discrete Log?
arXiv:math/0411378v3 [math.NT] 2 Sep 2005




                                                David Jao1 , Stephen Miller⋆,2,3 , and Ramarathnam Venkatesan1
                                                         1
                                                           Microsoft Research, 1 Microsoft Way, Redmond WA 98052
                                                                      {davidjao,venkie}@microsoft.com
                                                              2
                                                                 Department of Mathematics, Rutgers University
                                                               110 Frelinghuysen Rd, Piscataway, NJ 08854-8019
                                                  3
                                                    Einstein Institute of Mathematics, Edmond J. Safra Campus, Givat Ram
                                                         The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91904 Israel
                                                                           miller@math.huji.ac.il




                                                    Abstract. The aim of this paper is to justify the common cryptographic
                                                    practice of selecting elliptic curves using their order as the primary cri-
                                                    terion. We can formalize this issue by asking whether the discrete log
                                                    problem (dlog) has the same difficulty for all curves over a given fi-
                                                    nite field with the same order. We prove that this is essentially true
                                                    by showing polynomial time random reducibility of dlog among such
                                                    curves, assuming the Generalized Riemann Hypothesis (GRH). We do so
                                                    by constructing certain expander graphs, similar to Ramanujan graphs,
                                                    with elliptic curves as nodes and low degree isogenies as edges. The re-
                                                    sult is obtained from the rapid mixing of random walks on this graph.
                                                    Our proof works only for curves with (nearly) the same endomorphism
                                                    rings. Without this technical restriction such a dlog equivalence might
                                                    be false; however, in practice the restriction may be moot, because all
                                                    known polynomial time techniques for constructing equal order curves
                                                    produce only curves with nearly equal endomorphism rings.
                                                    Keywords: random reducibility, discrete log, elliptic curves, isogenies,
                                                    modular forms, L-functions, generalized Riemann hypothesis, Ramanu-
                                                    jan graphs, expanders, rapid mixing.



                                            1      Introduction

                                            Public key cryptosystems based on the elliptic curve discrete loga-
                                            rithm (dlog) problem [22, 34] have received considerable attention
                                            ⋆
                                                Partially supported by NSF grant DMS-0301172 and an Alfred P. Sloan Foundation
                                                Fellowship.
Jao, Miller, and Venkatesan                   Difficulty of Discrete Log

because they are currently the most widely used systems whose un-
derlying mathematical problem has yet to admit subexponential at-
tacks (see [3, 31, 46]). Hence it is important to formally understand
how the choice of elliptic curve affects the difficulty of the result-
ing dlog problem. This turns out to be more intricate than the
corresponding problem of dlog over finite fields and their selection.
    To motivate the questions in this paper, we begin with two ob-
servations. First, we note that one typically picks an elliptic curve at
random, and examines its group order (e.g. to check if it is smooth)
to decide whether to keep it, or discard it and pick another one. It is
therefore a natural question whether or not dlog is of the same dif-
ficulty on curves over the same field with the same number of points.
Indeed, it is a theorem of Tate that curves E1 and E2 defined over
the same finite field Fq have the same number of points if and only
if they are isogenous, i.e., there exists a nontrivial algebraic group
homomorphism φ : E1 → E2 between them. If this φ is efficiently
computable and has a small kernel over Fq , we can solve dlog on
E1 , given a dlog oracle for E2 .
    Secondly, we recall the observation that dlog on (Z/pZ)∗ has
random self-reducibility: given any efficient algorithm A(g x ) = x
that solves dlog on a polynomial fraction of inputs, one can solve
any instance y = g x by an expected polynomial number of calls
to A with random inputs of the form A(g r y). Thus, if dlog on
(Z/pZ)∗ is hard in a sense suitable for cryptography at all (e.g., has
no polynomial on average attack), then all but a negligible fraction of
instances of dlog on (Z/pZ)∗ must necessarily be hard. This result
is comforting since for cryptographic use we need the dlog problem
to be hard with overwhelming probability when we pick inputs at
random. The same random self-reduction statement also holds true
for dlog on any abelian group, and in particular for dlog on a fixed
elliptic curve. We consider instead the following question: given a
polynomial time algorithm to solve dlog on some positive (or non-
negligible) fraction of isogenous elliptic curves over Fq , can we solve
dlog for all curves in the same isogeny class in polynomial time? In
this paper we show that the answer to this question is essentially yes,
by proving (assuming GRH) the mixing properties of random walks
of isogenies on elliptic curves. It follows that if dlog is hard at all in
an isogeny class, then dlog is hard for all but a negligible fraction of

                                    2
Jao, Miller, and Venkatesan                   Difficulty of Discrete Log

elliptic curves in that isogeny class. This result therefore justifies, in
an average case sense, the cryptographic practice of selecting curves
at random within an isogeny class.

1.1   Summary of our results
The conventional wisdom is that if two elliptic curves over the same
finite field have the same order, then their discrete logarithm prob-
lems are equally hard. Indeed, this philosophy is embodied in the
way one picks curves in practice. However, such a widely relied upon
assertion merits formal justification. Our work shows that this sim-
plified belief is essentially true for all elliptic curves which are con-
structible using present techniques, but with an important qualifica-
tion which we shall now describe.
    Specifically, let SN,q denote the set of elliptic curves defined over
a given finite field Fq , up to F̄q -isomorphism, that have the same
order N over Fq . We split SN,q into levels (as in Kohel [23]), where
each level represents all elliptic curves having a particular endomor-
phism ring over F̄q . The curves in each level form the vertices of an
isogeny graph [10, 11, 33], whose edges represent prime degree isoge-
nies between curves of degree less than some specified bound m.

Theorem 1.1. (Assuming GRH) There exists a polynomial p(x),
independent of N and q, such that for m = p(log q) the isogeny
graph G on each level is an expander graph, in the sense that any
random walk on G will reach a subset of size h with probability at least
 h
2|G|
     after polylog(q) steps (where the implicit polynomial is again
independent of N and q).

Corollary 1.2 (Assuming GRH) The dlog problem on elliptic curves
is random reducible in the following sense: given any algorithm A
that solves dlog on some fixed positive proportion of curves in fixed
level, one can probabilistically solve dlog on any given curve in that
same level with polylog(q) expected queries to A with random inputs.

    The proofs are given at the end of Section 4. These results consti-
tute the first formulation of a polynomial time random reducibility
result for the elliptic curve dlog problem which is general enough
to apply to typical curves that one ordinarily encounters in practice.

                                    3
Jao, Miller, and Venkatesan                              Difficulty of Discrete Log

An essential tool in our proof is the nearly Ramanujan property of
Section 3, which we use to prove the expansion properties of our
isogeny graphs. The expansion property in turn allows us to prove
the rapid mixing of random walks given by compositions of small
degree isogenies within a fixed level. Our method uses GRH to prove
eigenvalue separation for these graphs, and provides a new technique
for constructing expander graphs.
     The results stated above concern a fixed level. One might there-
fore object that our work does not adequately address the issue of
dlog reduction in the case where two isogenous elliptic curves be-
long to different levels. If an attack is balanced, i.e., successful on
each level on a polynomial fraction of curves, then our results apply.
However, if only unbalanced attacks exist, then a more general equiv-
alence may be false for more fundamental reasons. Nevertheless, at
present this omission is not of much practical importance. First of
all, most random curves over Fq belong to sets SN,q consisting of only
one level (see Section 6); for example, in Figure 1, we find that 10 out
of the 11 randomly generated curves appearing in international stan-
dards documents have only one level. Second, if the endomorphism
rings corresponding to two levels have conductors whose prime fac-
torizations differ by quantities which are polynomially smooth, then
one can use the algorithms of [11, 23] to navigate to a common level
in polynomial time, and then apply Corollary 1.2 within that level to
conclude that dlog is polynomial-time random reducible between
the two levels. This situation always arises in practice, because no
polynomial time algorithm is known which even produces a pair of
curves lying on levels whose conductor difference is not polynomially
smooth. It is an open problem if such an algorithm exists.
     Our use of random walks to reach large subsets of the isogeny
graph is crucial, since constructing an isogeny between two specific
curves1 is believed to be inherently hard, whereas constructing an
isogeny from a fixed curve to a subset constituting a positive (or
polynomial) fraction of the isogeny graph is proved in this paper
to be easy. Kohel [23] and Galbraith [11] present exponential time
1
    If one uses polynomial size circuits (i.e., polynomial time algorithms with exponential
    time pre-processing) for reductions, then one can relate dlog on two given curves.
    This claim follows using the smallness of diameter of our graphs and the smoothness
    of the degrees of isogenies involved. We omit the details.


                                             4
Jao, Miller, and Venkatesan                              Difficulty of Discrete Log

     Curve        cπ (maximal conductor gap in isogeny class) P(cπ ) = largest prime factor of cπ
   NIST P-192                            1                                       1
   NIST P-256                            3                                       3
   NIST P-384                            1                                       1
   NIST P-521                            1                                       1
   NIST K-163               45641·82153·56498081·P (cπ )                     86110311
   NIST K-233               5610641·85310626991·P (cπ )                 150532234816721999
   NIST K-283                  1697·162254089·P (cπ )            1779143207551652584836995286271
   NIST K-409       21262439877311·22431439539154506863 ·P (cπ )  57030553306655053533734286593
                                                                 9021184135396238924389891(contd)
    NIST K-571                     3952463·P (cπ )               9451926768145189936450898(contd)
                                                                  07769277009849103733654828039
    NIST B-163                           1                                       1
    NIST B-233                           1                                       1
    NIST B-283                           1                                       1
    NIST B-409                           1                                       1
    NIST B-571                           1                                       1
       rd
IPSec 3 OG,F2155                         1                                       1
       th
IPSec 4 OG, F2185                        1                                       1



Fig. 1. A table of curves recommended as international standards
[16, 36]. Note that the value of cπ for each of the standards curves
is small (at most 3), except for the curves in the NIST K (Koblitz
curve) family. These phenomena are to be expected and are explained
in Section 6. Any curve with cπ = 1 has the property that its isogeny
class consists of only one level. It follows from the results of Sec-
tion 1.1 that randomly generated elliptic curves with cπ = 1 (or,
more generally, with smooth cπ ) will have discrete logarithm prob-
lems of typical difficulty amongst all elliptic curves in their isogeny
class.




algorithms (and thus exponential time reductions) for navigating be-
tween two nodes in the isogeny graph, some of which are based on
random walk heuristics which we prove here rigorously. Subsequent
papers on Weil descent attacks [12, 32] and elliptic curve trapdoor
systems [45] also use isogeny random walks in order to extend the
GHS Weil descent attack [13] to elliptic curves which are not them-
selves directly vulnerable to the GHS attack. Our work does not
imply any changes to the deductions of these papers, since they also
rely on the above heuristic assumptions involving exponentially long
random walks. In our case, we achieve polynomial time instead of
exponential time reductions; this is possible since we keep one curve
fixed, and random reducibility requires only that the other curve be
randomly distributed.

                                            5
Jao, Miller, and Venkatesan                  Difficulty of Discrete Log

2    Preliminaries
Let E1 and E2 be elliptic curves defined over a finite field Fq of char-
acteristic p. An isogeny φ : E1 → E2 defined over Fq is a non-constant
rational map defined over Fq which is also a group homomorphism
from E1 (Fq ) to E2 (Fq ) [42, §III.4]. The degree of an isogeny is its
degree as a rational map. For any elliptic curve E : y 2 + a1 xy + a3 y =
x3 + a2 x2 + a4 x + a6 defined over Fq , the Frobenius endomorphism
is the isogeny π : E → E of degree q given by the equation π(x, y) =
(xq , y q ). It satisfies the equation

                       π 2 − Trace(E)π + q = 0,
where Trace(E) = q + 1 −#E(Fq ) is the trace of the Frobenius endo-
morphism of E over Fq . The polynomial p(X) := X 2 −Trace(E)X +q
is called the characteristic polynomial of E.
    An endomorphism of E is an isogeny E → E defined over the
algebraic closure F̄q of Fq . The set of endomorphisms of E together
with the zero map forms a ring under the operations of pointwise
addition and composition; this ring is called the endomorphism ring
of E and denoted End(E). The ring End(E) is isomorphic either
to an order in a quaternion algebra or to an order in an imaginary
quadratic field [42, V.3.1]; in the first case we say E is supersingular
and in the second case we say E is ordinary. In the latter situation,
the Frobenius endomorphism π can be regarded as an algebraic in-
teger which is a root of the characteristic polynomial.
    Two elliptic curves E1 and E2 defined over Fq are said to be isoge-
nous over Fq if there exists an isogeny φ : E1 → E2 defined over Fq . A
theorem of Tate states that two curves E1 and E2 are isogenous over
Fq if and only if #E1 (Fq ) = #E2 (Fq ) [43, §3]. Since every isogeny has
a dual isogeny [42, III.6.1], the property of being isogenous over Fq
is an equivalence relation on the finite set of F̄q -isomorphism classes
of elliptic curves defined over Fq . We define an isogeny class to be
an equivalence class of elliptic curves, up to F̄q -isomorphism, under
this equivalence relation; the set SN,q of Section 1.1 is thus equal to
the isogeny class of elliptic curves over Fq having cardinality N.
    Curves in the same isogeny class are either all supersingular or all
ordinary. We assume for the remainder of this paper that we are in
the ordinary case, which is the more interesting case from the point

                                   6
Jao, Miller, and Venkatesan                 Difficulty of Discrete Log

of view of cryptography in light of the MOV attack [30]. Theorem 1.1
in the supersingular case was essentially known earlier by results of
Pizer [37, 38], and a proof has been included for completeness in
Appendix A.
    The following theorem describes the structure of elliptic curves
within an isogeny class from the point of view of their endomorphism
rings.

Theorem 2.1. Let E and E ′ be ordinary elliptic curves defined
over Fq which are isogenous over Fq . Let K denote the imaginary
quadratic field containing End(E), and write OK for the maximal
order (i.e., ring of integers) of K.
1. The order End(E) satisfies the property Z[π] ⊆ End(E) ⊆ OK .
2. The order End(E ′ ) also satisfies End(E ′ ) ⊂ K and Z[π] ⊆ End(E ′ ) ⊆
   OK .
3. The following are equivalent:
  (a) End(E) = End(E ′ ).
  (b) There exist two isogenies φ : E → E ′ and ψ : E → E ′ of rela-
       tively prime degree, both defined over Fq .
  (c) [OK : End(E)] = [OK : End(E ′ )].
  (d) [End(E) : Z[π]] = [End(E ′ ) : Z[π]].
4. Let φ : E → E ′ be an isogeny from E to E ′ of prime degree ℓ, de-
   fined over Fq . Then either End(E) contains End(E ′ ) or End(E ′ )
   contains End(E), and the index of the smaller in the larger di-
   vides ℓ.
5. Suppose ℓ is a prime that divides one of [OK : End(E)] and
   [OK : End(E ′ )], but not the other. Then every isogeny φ : E → E ′
   defined over Fq has degree equal to a multiple of ℓ.

Proof. [23, §4.2].

   For any order O ⊆ OK , the conductor of O is defined to be
the integer [OK : O]. The field K is called the CM field of E. We
write cE for the conductor of End(E) and cπ for the conductor of
Z[π]. Note that this is not the same thing as the arithmetic con-
ductor of an elliptic curve [42, §C.16], nor is it related to the con-
ductance of an expander graph [21]. It follows from [4, (7.2) and

                                  7
Jao, Miller, and Venkatesan                   Difficulty of Discrete Log

(7.3)] that End(E) = Z + cE OK and D = c2E dK , where D (respec-
tively, dK ) is the discriminant of the order End(E) (respectively,
OK ). Furthermore, the characteristic polynomial p(X) has discrim-
inant dπ = disc(p(X)) = Trace(E)2 − 4q = disc(Z[π]) = c2π dK , with
cπ = cE · [End(E) : Z[π]].
    Following [10] and [11], we say that an isogeny φ : E → E ′ of
prime degree ℓ defined over Fq is “down” if [End(E) : End(E ′ )] =
ℓ, “up” if [End(E ′ ) : End(E)] = ℓ, and “horizontal” if End(E) =
End(E). The following theorem classifies the number ofdegree ℓ
isogenies of each type in terms of the Legendre symbol Dℓ .
Theorem 2.2. Let E be an ordinary elliptic curve over Fq , with
endomorphism ring End(E) of discriminant D. Let ℓ be a prime
different from the characteristic of Fq .
 – Assume ℓ ∤ cE . Then there are exactly 1+ Dℓ horizontal isogenies
                                                    

    φ : E → E ′ of degree ℓ.
     • If ℓ ∤ cπ , there are no other isogenies E → E ′ of degree ℓ over
        Fq .
     • If ℓ | cπ , there are ℓ − Dℓ down isogenies of degree ℓ.
                                     

 – Assume ℓ | cE . Then there is one up isogeny E → E ′ of degree ℓ.
     • If ℓ ∤ ccEπ , there are no other isogenies E → E ′ of degree ℓ over
        Fq .
     • If ℓ | ccEπ , there are ℓ down isogenies of degree ℓ.
Proof. [10, §2.1] or [11, §11.5].
    It follows that the maximal conductor difference between levels
in an isogeny class is achieved between a curve at the top level (with
End(E) = OK ) and a curve at the bottom level (with End(E) =
Z[π]).

2.1   Isogeny Graphs
We define two curves E1 and E2 in an isogeny class SN,q to have the
same level if End(E1 ) = End(E2 ). An isogeny graph is a graph whose
nodes consist of all elements in SN,q belonging to a fixed level. Note
that a horizontal isogeny always goes between two curves of the same
level; likewise, an up isogeny enlarges the size of the endomorphism

                                    8
Jao, Miller, and Venkatesan                  Difficulty of Discrete Log

ring and a down isogeny reduces the size. Since there are fewer elliptic
curves at higher levels than at lower levels, the collection of isogeny
graphs under the level interpretation visually resembles a “pyramid”
or a “volcano” [10], with up isogenies ascending the structure and
down isogenies descending.
     As in [15, Prop. 2.3], we define two isogenies φ : E1 → E2 and
φ′ : E1 → E2 to be equivalent if there exists an automorphism α ∈
Aut(E2 ) (i.e., an invertible endomorphism) such that φ′ = αφ. The
edges of the graph consist of equivalence classes of isogenies over Fq
between elliptic curve representatives of nodes in the graph, which
have prime degree less than the bound (log q)2+δ for some fixed con-
stant δ > 0. The degree bound must be small enough to permit the
isogenies to be computed, but large enough to allow the graph to be
connected and to have the rapid mixing properties that we want. We
will show in Section 4 that there exists a constant δ > 0 for which
a bound of (log q)2+δ satisfies all the requirements, provided that we
restrict the isogenies to a single level.
     Accordingly, fix a level of the isogeny class, and let End(E) = O
be the common endomorphism ring of all of the elliptic curves in this
level. Denote by G the regular graph whose vertices are elements
of SN,q with endomorphism ring O, and whose edges are equiva-
lence classes of horizontal isogenies defined over Fq of prime degree
≤ (log q)2+δ . By standard facts from the theory of complex multi-
plication [4, §10], each invertible ideal a ⊂ O produces an elliptic
curve C/a defined over some number field L ⊂ C (called the ring
class field of O) [4, §11]. The curve C/a has complex multiplication
by O, and two different ideals yield isomorphic curves if and only if
they belong to the same ideal class. Likewise, each invertible ideal
b ⊂ O defines an isogeny C/a → C/ab−1 , and the degree of this
isogeny is the norm N(b) of the ideal b. Moreover, for any prime
ideal P in L lying over p, the reductions mod P of the above elliptic
curves and isogenies are defined over Fq , and every elliptic curve and
every horizontal isogeny in G arises in this way (see [11, §3] for the
p > 3 case, and [12] for the small characteristic case). Therefore,
the isogeny graph G is isomorphic to the corresponding graph H
whose nodes are elliptic curves C/a with complex multiplication by
O, and whose edges are complex analytic isogenies represented by
ideals b ⊂ O and subject to the same degree bound as before. This

                                   9
Jao, Miller, and Venkatesan                  Difficulty of Discrete Log

isomorphism preserves the degrees of isogenies, in the sense that the
degree of any isogeny in G is equal to the norm of its corresponding
ideal b in H.
    The graph H has an alternate description as a Cayley graph on
the ideal class group Cl(O) of O. Indeed, each node of H is an ideal
class of O, and two ideal classes [a1 ] and [a2 ] are connected by an
edge if and only if there exists a prime ideal b of norm ≤ (log q)2+δ
such that [a1 b] = [a2 ]. Therefore, the graph H (and hence the graph
G) is isomorphic to the Cayley graph of the group Cl(O) with respect
to the generators [b] ∈ Cl(O), as b ranges over all prime ideals of O
of norm ≤ (log q)2+δ .

Remark 2.1. The isogeny graph G consists of objects defined over the
finite field Fq , whereas the objects in the graph H are defined over the
number field L. One passes from H to G by taking reductions mod P,
and from G to H by using Deuring’s Lifting Theorem [8,11,24]. There
is no known polynomial time or even subexponential time algorithm
for computing the isomorphism between G and H [11, §3]. For our
purposes, such an explicit algorithm is not necessary, since we only
use the complex analytic theory to prove abstract graph-theoretic
properties of G.

Remark 2.2. The isogeny graph G is typically a symmetric graph,
since each isogeny φ has a unique dual isogeny φ̂ : E2 → E1 of the
same degree as φ in the opposite direction [42, §III.6]. (From the
viewpoint of H, an isogeny represented by an ideal b ⊂ O has its
dual isogeny represented simply by the complex conjugate b̄.) How-
ever, the definition of equivalence of isogenies from [15] given in 2.1
contains a subtle asymmetry which can sometimes render the graph
G asymmetric in the supersingular case (Appendix A). Namely, if
Aut(E1 ) is not equal to Aut(E2 ), then two isogenies E1 → E2 can
sometimes be equivalent even when their dual isogenies are not.
For ordinary elliptic curves within a common level, the equation
End(E1 ) = End(E2 ) automatically implies Aut(E1 ) = Aut(E2 ), so
the graph G is always symmetric in this case. Hence, we may regard
G as undirected and apply known results about undirected expander
graphs (as in the following section) to G.

                                   10
Jao, Miller, and Venkatesan                             Difficulty of Discrete Log

3      Expander Graphs

Let G = (V, E) be a finite graph on h vertices V with undirected
edges E. Suppose G is a regular graph of degree k, i.e., exactly k edges
meet at each vertex. Given a labeling of the vertices V = {v1 , . . . , vh },
the adjacency matrix of G is the symmetric h×h matrix A whose ij-
th entry Aij = 1 if an edge exists between vi and vj , and 0 otherwise.
     It is convenient to identify functions on V with vectors in Rh via
this labeling, and therefore also think of A as a self-adjoint opera-
tor on L2 (V). All of the eigenvalues of A satisfy the bound |λ| ≤ k.
Constant vectors are eigenfunctions of A with eigenvalue k, which for
obvious reasons is called the trivial eigenvalue λtriv . A family of such
graphs G with h → ∞ is said to be a sequence of expander graphs if
all other eigenvalues of their adjacency matrices are bounded away
from λtriv = k by a fixed amount.2 In particular, no other eigen-
value is equal to k; this implies the graph is connected. A Ramanujan
                                                              √
graph [29] is a special type of expander which has |λ| ≤ 2 k − 1 for
any nontrivial eigenvalue which is not equal to −k (this last possibil-
ity happens if and only if the graph is bipartite). The supersingular
isogeny graphs in Appendix A are sometimes Ramanujan, while the
ordinary isogeny graphs in Section 2.1 do not qualify, partly because
their degree is not bounded. Nevertheless, they still share the most
important properties of expanders as far as our applications are con-
cerned. In particular their degree k grows slowly (as a polynomial in
log |V|), and they share a qualitatively similar eigenvalue separation:
instead the nontrivial eigenvalues λ can be arranged to be O(k 1/2+ε )
for any desired value of ε > 0. Since our goal is to establish a poly-
nomial time reduction, this enlarged degree bound is natural, and in
fact necessary for obtaining expanders from abelian Cayley graphs
[1]. Obtaining any nontrivial exponent β < 1 satisfying λ = O(k β ) is
a key challenge for many applications, and accordingly we shall focus
on a type of graphs we call “nearly Ramanujan” graphs: families of
graphs whose nontrivial eigenvalues λ satisfy that bound.
     A fundamental use of expanders is to prove the rapid mixing of
the random walk on V along the edges E. The following rapid mixing
2
    Expansion is usually phrased in terms of the number of neighbors of subsets of G, but
    the spectral condition here is equivalent for k-regular graphs and also more useful
    for our purposes.


                                           11
Jao, Miller, and Venkatesan                   Difficulty of Discrete Log

result is standard but we present it below for convenience. For more
information, see [5, 28, 40].
Proposition 3.1 Let G be a regular graph of degree k on h ver-
tices. Suppose that the eigenvalue λ of any nonconstant eigenvector
satisfies the bound |λ| ≤ c for some c < k. Let S be any subset of
the vertices of G, and x be any vertex in G. Then a random walk
                           2h/|S|1/2
of any length at least log log k/c
                                     starting from x will land in S with
probability at least |S|
                     2h
                            |S|
                         = 2|G| .
Proof. There are k r random walks of length r starting from x. One
would expect in a truly random situation that roughly |S|
                                                       h
                                                          k r of these
                                                    1/2
land in S. The lemma asserts that for r ≥ log log
                                              2h/|S|
                                                  k/c
                                                      at least half that
number of walks in fact do. Denoting the characteristic functions of
S and {x} as χS and χ{x} , respectively, we count that
# {walks of length r starting at x and landing in S} = h χS , Ar χ{x} i ,
                                                                (3.1)
                                                        2
where h·, ·i denotes the inner product of functions in L (V). We esti-
mate this as follows. Write the orthogonal decompositions of χS and
χ{x} as
              |S|                                   1
     χS    =      1 + u      and          χ{x} =       1 + w,        (3.2)
               h                                    h
where 1 is the constant vector and hu, 1i = hw, 1i = 0. Then (3.1)
equals the expected value of |S|
                               h
                                 k r , plus the additional term hu, Ar wi,
                             r
which is bounded by kuk kA wk. Because w ⊥ 1 and the symmetric
matrix Ar has spectrum bounded by cr on the span of such vectors,
 kuk kAr wk ≤ cr kuk kwk ≤ cr kχS k kχ{x} k = cr |S|1/2 . (3.3)

For our values of r this is at most half of |S|h
                                                 k r , so indeed at least
1 |S|
2 h
      k r of the paths terminate in S as was required.
                                          k         h
    In our application the quantities k, k−c , and |S| will all be bounded
by polynomials in log(h). Under these hypotheses, the probability is
at least 1/2 that some polylog(h) trials of random walks of polylog(h)
length starting from x will reach S at least once. This mixing es-
timate is the source of our polynomial time random reducibility
(Corollary 1.2).

                                    12
Jao, Miller, and Venkatesan                        Difficulty of Discrete Log

4     Spectral Properties of the Isogeny Graph
4.1   Navigating the Isogeny Graph

Let G be as in Section 2.1. The isogeny graph G has exponentially
many nodes and thus is too large to be stored. However, given a curve
E and a prime ℓ, it is possible to efficiently compute the curves which
are connected to E by an isogeny of degree ℓ. These curves E ′ have
j-invariants which can be found by solving the modular polynomial
relation Φℓ (j(E), j(E ′ )) = 0; the cost of this step is O(ℓ3) field oper-
ations [11, 11.6]. Given the j-invariants, the isogenies themselves can
then be obtained using the algorithms of [10] (or [26, 27] when the
characteristic of the field is small). In this way, it is possible to nav-
igate the isogeny graph locally without computing the entire graph.
We shall see that it suffices to have the degree of the isogenies in the
graph be bounded by (log q)2+δ to assure the Ramanujan properties
required for G to be an expander.

4.2   θ-Functions and Graph Eigenvalues

The graph H (and therefore also the isomorphic graph G) has one
node for each ideal class of O. Therefore, the total number of nodes
in the graph G is the ideal class number of the order O, and the ver-
tices V can be identified with ideal class representatives {α1 , . . . , αh }.
Using theP isomorphism between G and H, we see that the generating
function     Mαi ,αj (n)q n for degree n isogenies between the vertices
αi and αj of G is given by
            ∞
            X                         1      X                     −1
                 Mαi ,αj (n) q n :=                    q N (z)/N (αi αj ) ,   (4.1)
           n=1
                                      e
                                           z ∈ α−1
                                                i αj


where e is the number of units in O (which always equals 2 for
disc(O) > 4). The sum on the righthand side depends only on the
ideal class of the fractional ideal αi−1 αj ; by viewing the latter as a
lattice in C, we see that N(z)/N(αi−1 αj ) is a quadratic form of dis-
criminant D where D := disc(O) [4, p. 142]. That means this sum
is a θ-series, accordingly denoted as θα−1 αj (q). It is a holomorphic
                                           i
modular form of weight 1 for the congruence subgroup Γ0 (|D|) of

                                      13
Jao, Miller, and Venkatesan                           Difficulty of Discrete Log

                                                               D
                                                                   
SL(2, Z), transforming according to the character              ·
                                                                       (see [19, The-
orem 10.9]).
     Before discussing exactly which degrees of isogenies to admit into
our isogeny graph G, let us first make some remarks about the sim-
pler graph on V = {α1 , . . . , αh } whose edges represent isogenies of
degree exactly equal to n. Its adjacency
                                               matrix is of course the
h × h matrix M(n) = Mαi ,αj (n) {1≤i,j≤h} defined by series coef-
ficients in (4.1). It can be naturally viewed as an operator which
acts on functions on V = {α1 , . . . , αh }, by identifying them with
h-vectors according to this labeling. We will now simultaneously di-
agonalize all M(n),     or what amounts to the same, diagonalize the
matrix Aq = n≥1 M(n)q n for any value of q < 1 (where the sum
                  P
converges absolutely). The primary reason this is possible is that for
each fixed n this graph is an abelian Cayley graph on the ideal class
group Cl(O), with generating set equal to those classes αi which rep-
resent an n-isogeny. The eigenfunctions of the adjacency matrix of
an abelian Cayley graph are always given by characters of the group
(viewed as functions on the graph), and their respective eigenvalues
are sums of these characters over the generating set. This can be
seen directly in our circumstance as follows. The ij-th entry of Aq
is 1e θα−1
        i αj
             (q), which we recall depends only on the ideal class of the
fractional ideal αi−1 αj . If χ is any character of Cl(O), viewed as the
h-vector whose i-th entry is χ(αi ), then the i-th entry of the vector
Aq χ may be evaluated through matrix multiplication as


                                                                                   
                1     X                               1    X
(Aq χ)(αi ) =                   θα−1
                                  i αj
                                       (q) χ(αj ) =                    χ(αj ) θαj (q) χ(αi ) ,
                e                                     e
                    αj ∈Cl(O)                             αj ∈Cl(O)
                                                                 (4.2)
where in the last equality we have reindexed αj 7→ αi αj using the
group structure of Cl(O). Therefore χ is in fact an eigenvector of
the matrix eAq , with eigenvalue equal to the sum of θ-functions
enclosed in parentheses, known as a Hecke θ-function (see [19, §12]).
These, which we shall denote θχ (q), form a more natural basis of
modular forms than the ideal class θ-functions θαj because they are
in fact Hecke eigenforms. Using (4.1), the L-functions of these Hecke

                                         14
Jao, Miller, and Venkatesan                         Difficulty of Discrete Log

characters can be written as
                                    X                                        ∞
                                                                             X
                                                               −s
L(s, χ) = L(s, θχ ) =                              χ(a) (Na)          =            an (χ) n−s ,
                             integral ideals a⊂K                             n=1
                                    X
      where     an (χ) =                           χ(a)
                             integral ideals a⊂K
                                    N a=n
                                                                 (4.3)
is in fact simply the eigenvalue of e M(n) for the eigenvector formed
from the character χ as above, which can be seen by isolating the
coefficient of q n in the sum on the righthand side of (4.2).

4.3    Eigenvalue Separation under the Generalized
       Riemann Hypothesis
Our isogeny graph is a superposition of the previous graphs M(n),
where n is a prime bounded by a parameter m (which we recall
is (log q)2+δ for some fixed δ > 0). This corresponds to a graph
on the elliptic
         √      curves represented by ideal classes in an order O of
K = Q( d), whose edges represent isogenies of prime degree ≤ m.
The graphs with adjacency matrices {M(p) | p ≤ m} above share
common eigenfunctions (the characters χ of Cl(O)), and so their
eigenvalues are
              1 X                  1 X               X
      λχ =          ap (χ)   =                                      χ(a) .     (4.4)
              e p≤m                e p≤m
                                             integral ideals a⊂ K
                                                    N a= p

When χ is the trivial character, λtriv equals the degree of the reg-
ular graph G. Since roughly half of rational primes p split in K,
and those which do split into two ideals of norm p, λtriv is roughly
π(m)       m
  e
      ∼ e log m
                by the prime number theorem. This eigenvalue is al-
ways the largest in absolute value, as can be deduced from (4.4),
because |χ(a)| always equals 1 when χ is the trivial character. For
the polynomial mixing of the random walk in Theorem 1.1 we will
require a separation between the trivial and nontrivial eigenvalues
of size 1/polylog(q). This would be the case, for example, if for each
nontrivial character χ there merely exists one ideal a of prime norm
                              1
≤ m with Re χ(a) ≤ 1 − polylog(q) . This is analogous to the problem

                                    15
Jao, Miller, and Venkatesan                 Difficulty of Discrete Log

of finding a small prime nonresidue modulo, say, a large prime Q,
where onePmerely  needs to find any cancellation at all in the charac-
                p
ter sum p≤m Q . However, the latter requires a strong assumption
from analytic number theory, such as the Generalized Riemann Hy-
pothesis (GRH). In the next section we will accordingly derive such
bounds for λχ , under the assumption of GRH. As a consequence of
the more general Lemma 5.3 we will show the following.

Lemma 4.1 Let D < 0 and let O be the quadratic order of discrim-
inant D. If χ is a nontrivial ideal class character of O, then the Gen-
eralized Riemann Hypothesis for L(s, χ) implies that the sum (4.4)
is bounded by O(m1/2 log |mD|) with an absolute implied constant.

Proof (of Theorem 1.1). There are only finitely many levels for q
less than any given bound, so it suffices to prove the theorem for
q large and p(x) = x2+δ , where δ > 0 is fixed. The eigenvalues of
the adjacency matrix for a given level are given by (4.4). Recall that
                         m
|D| ≤ 4q and λtriv ∼ e log m
                             . With our choice of m = p(log q), the
bound for the nontrivial eigenvalues in Lemma 4.1 is λχ = O(λβtriv)
                   1
for any β > 21 + δ+2  . That means indeed our isogeny graphs are
expanders for q large; the random walk assertion follows from this
bound and Proposition 3.1.

Proof (of Corollary 1.2). The Theorem shows that a random walk
from any fixed curve E probabilistically reaches the proportion where
the algorithm A succeeds, in at most polylog(q) steps. Since each
step is a low degree isogeny, their composition can be computed in
polylog(q) steps. Even though the degree of this isogeny might be
large, the degrees of each step are small. This provides the random
polynomial time reduction of dlog along successive curves in the
random walk, and hence from E to a curve for which the algorithm
A succeeds.


5   The Prime Number Theorem for Modular
    Form L-functions
In this section we prove Lemma 4.1, assuming the Generalized Rie-
mann Hypothesis (GRH) for the L-functions (4.3). Our argument

                                  16
Jao, Miller, and Venkatesan                     Difficulty of Discrete Log

is
P more general, and in fact gives estimates for sums of the form
   p≤m ap , where ap are the prime coefficients of any L-function. This
can be thought of as an analog of the Prime Number Theorem be-
cause for the simplest L-function, ζ(s), ap = 1 and this sum is in fact
exactly π(m). As a compromise between readability and generality,
we will restrict the presentation here to the case of modular form
L-functions (including (4.3)). Background references for this section
include [19, 20, 35]; for information about more general L-functions
see also [14, 39].
    We shall now consider a classical
                                  P∞ holomorphic         modular form f ,
                                              2πinz
with Fourier expansion f (z) = n = 0 cn e           . We will assume that
f is a Hecke eigenform, since this condition is met in the situation of
Lemma 4.1 (see the comments between (4.2) and (4.3)). It is natural
to study the renormalized coefficients an = n−(k−1)/2 cn , where k ≥ 1
is the weight of f (in Section 4.2 k = 1, so an = cn ). The L-function of
such a modularQ    form can be written as the Dirichlet series L(s, f ) =
   ∞        −s
               = p (1 −αp p−s )−1 (1 −βp p−s )−1 , the last equality using
P
   n=1 an n
the fact that f is a Hecke eigenform. The L-function L(s, f ) is entire
when f is a cusp form (e.g. a0 = 0). The Ramanujan conjecture (in
this case a theorem of [6] and [7]) asserts that |αp |, |βp | ≤ 1.
    Lemma 4.1 is concerned with estimates for the sums
                                        X
                         S(m, f ) :=           ap .                  (5.1)
                                         p≤m


As with the prime number theorem, it is more convenient to instead
analyze the weighted sum
                                        X
                      ψ(m, f ) :=            bpk log p               (5.2)
                                        pk


over prime powers, where the coefficients bn are those appearing in
                             ′
the Dirichlet series for − LL (s):
               ∞
       L′     X                 X
      − (s) =     bn Λ(n) n−s =      bpk log(p) p −k s ,
       L      n=1               p, k


i.e., bpk = αpk + βpk .

                                   17
Jao, Miller, and Venkatesan                             Difficulty of Discrete Log

Lemma 5.1 For a holomorphic modular form f one has
                       X
           ψ(m, f ) =      ap log p + O(m1/2 ).
                                      p≤m

Proof. The error term represents the contribution of proper prime
powers. Since |bpk | ≤ 2, it is bounded by twice
 X                  X                 X           log m
     log p =               log p ≤          log p        ≤ π(m1/2 ) log m ,
 k                                      1/2
                                                   log p
p ≤m                  1/2
                       p≤m                   p≤m
 k≥2                 2 ≤ k ≤ log m
                              log p

                                                                                (5.3)
                  1/2
which is O(m            ) by the Prime Number Theorem.
Lemma 5.2 (Iwaniec [20, p. 114]) Assume that f is a holomorphic
modular cusp form of level3 N and that L(s, f ) satisfies GRH. Then
ψ(m, f ) = O(m1/2 log(m) log(mN)).
   We deduce that S ′ (m, f ) := p≤m ap log p = O(m1/2 log(m) log(mN)).
                                P
Finally we shall estimate the sums S(m, f ) from (5.1) by removing
the log(m) using a standard partial summation argument.
Lemma 5.3 Suppose that f is a holomorphic modular cusp form of
level N and L(s, f ) satisfies GRH. Then S(m, f ) = O(m1/2 log(mN)).
Proof. First define ãp to be ap , if p is prime, and 0 otherwise. Then
     X             X                  1        X                  1
          ap =          [ãp log p]        =        [ãn log n]       .
     p≤m           p≤m
                                    log p      n≤m
                                                                log n

By partial summation over 2 ≤ n ≤ m, we then find
                                                  S ′ (m, f )
                                             
X          X
               ′             1         1
    ap =      S (n, f )          −              +
p≤m       n<m
                          log(n)   log(n + 1)       log m
               X                                      d
                        n1/2 log(n) log(nN)             (log n)−1 + m1/2 log(mN)
                                                                
           ≪
               n<m
                                                     dn
               X                                 1
           ≪         n1/2 log(n) log(nN)               + m1/2 log(mN) ,
               n<m
                                             n(log n)2
                                             1/2
                             P
so in fact S(m, f ) =            p≤m ap = O(m    log(mN)).
3
    Actually in [20] N equals the conductor of the L-function, which in general may be
    smaller than the level. The lemma is of course nevertheless valid.


                                            18
Jao, Miller, and Venkatesan                 Difficulty of Discrete Log

   All the implied constants in these 3 lemmas are absolute. Some
useful estimates for them may be found in [2].

5.1   Subexponential Reductions via Lindelöf Hypothesis
In the previous lemma we have assumed GRH. It seems very difficult
to get a corresponding unconditional bound for S(m, f ). However,
a slightly weaker statement can be proven by assuming only the
Lindelöf hypothesis (which is a consequence of GRH). Namely, one
has that n≤m an = Oε (m1/2+ε N ε ), for any ε > 0 ([19, (5.61)]).
           P
The fact that this last sum is over all n ≤ m, not just primes, is not
of crucial importance for our application. However, the significant
difference here is that the dependence on N is not polynomial in
log N, but merely subexponential. This observation can be used to
weaken the hypothesis in Theorem 1.1 and Corollary 1.2 from GRH
to the Lindelöf hypothesis, at the expense of replacing “polynomial”
by “subexponential.”

6     Distribution of cπ
Theorem 1.1 and Corollary 1.2 are statements about individual lev-
els. As we mentioned in Section 1.1, our random reducibility result
extends between two levels as long as the levels satisfy the require-
ment that their conductors differ by polynomially smooth amounts.
In this section we explore this extension in more detail, and explain
why the above requirement is typically satisfied.
    It was mentioned after Theorem 2.2 that the largest possible
conductor difference is cπ , which is the largest square factor of dπ =
                                                                    √
Trace(E)2 − 4q. In principle this factor could be as large as 2 q,
though statistically speaking most integers (a proportion of π62 ≈ .61)
are square-free, explaining why cπ is very often 1 or at least fairly
small [44]. This means, for example, that most randomly selected
elliptic curves have an isogeny class consisting of only one level.
    When an isogeny class consists of multiple levels, we need to be
able to construct vertical isogenies between levels in order to con-
clude that dlog instances between the levels are randomly reducible
to each other. The fastest known algorithm for constructing vertical
isogenies between two levels, due to Kohel [23], has runtime O(ℓ4 ),

                                  19
Jao, Miller, and Venkatesan                  Difficulty of Discrete Log

where ℓ is the largest prime dividing the conductor of one of the
levels, but not the other. Any two levels which can be efficiently
bridged via Kohel’s algorithm can be considered as one unit for the
purposes of random reducibility. Accordingly, polynomial time ran-
dom reducibility holds within an isogeny class if cπ for that isogeny
class is polynomially smooth.
    With this in mind, we will now determine a heuristic estimate
for the expected size of the largest prime factor P (cπ ) of cπ , i.e.,
the largest prime which divides dπ to order at least 2. The trace
t = Trace(E), when sampled over random elliptic curves, is thought
to have a fairly uniform distribution over most of the Hasse interval.
This serves to predict the useful heuristic that −dπ = 4q − t2 is
typically of size q (see for example [25, 41]). Assuming that, the
probability that P (cπ ) exceeds β can be loosely estimated as O(1/β).
                                             Q√q
This is because roughly a fraction of ρ = p > β (1 − p−2 ) integers
of size q have noPrepeated prime factor p > β. It is easy to see
that log(ρ) = O( n>β n−2 ) = O(1/β), so that 1 − ρ = O(1/β) as
suggested.
    It follows that a randomly selected elliptic curve is extremely
likely to have a small enough value of P (cπ ) to allow for random
reducibility throughout its entire isogeny class. This explains why
in Figure 1 all of the randomly generated curves have P (cπ ) = 1,
except for one curve which has P (cπ ) = 3.
    Finally, let us consider the situation where a non-random curve
is deliberately selected so as to have a large value of cπ . Currently
the only known methods for constructing such curves is to use com-
plex multiplication methods [3, Ch. VIII] to construct curves with a
predetermined√ number of points chosen to ensure that cπ is almost
as large as dπ . Some convenient examples of such curves are the
Koblitz curves listed in the NIST FIPS 186-2 document [36], which
we have also tabulated in Figure 1. Since√these curves all have com-
plex multiplication by the field K = Q( −7), the discriminants of
these curves are of the form √dπ = −7c2π . If we assume that cπ behaves
                                                       √
as a random integer of size dπ , which is roughly q, then the dis-
tribution of P (cπ ) is governed by the usual smoothness bounds for
large integers [44], and hence is typically too large to permit efficient
application of Kohel’s algorithm for navigating between levels. Thus

                                   20
Jao, Miller, and Venkatesan                           Difficulty of Discrete Log

we cannot prove random reducibility from a theoretical standpoint
for all of the elliptic curves within the isogeny class SN,q of such a spe-
cially constructed curve. However, in practice only a small subset of
the elliptic curves in SN,q are efficiently constructible using the com-
plex multiplication method (or any other presently known method),
and this subset coincides exactly with the subcollection of levels in
SN,q which are accessible from the top level (where End(E) = OK )
using Kohel’s algorithm. Pending future developments, it therefore
remains true that all of the special curves that we can construct
within an isogeny class have equivalent dlog problems in the ran-
dom reducible sense.
    Acknowledgments: It is a pleasure to thank William Aiello,
Michael Ben-Or, Dan Boneh, Brian Conrad, Adolf Hildebrand, Hen-
ryk Iwaniec, Dimitar Jetchev, Neal Koblitz, Alexander Lubotzky,
Peter Sarnak, Adi Shamir, and Yacov Yacobi for their discussions
and helpful comments. We are also indebted to Peter Montgomery
for his factoring assistance in producing Figure 1.

References
 1. Noga Alon and Yuval Roichman, Random Cayley graphs and expanders, Random
    Structures Algorithms 5 (1994), 271–284.
 2. Eric Bach and Jonathan Sorenson, Explicit bounds for primes in residue classes,
    Math. Comp. 65 (1996), 1717–1735.
 3. I. F. Blake, G. Seroussi, and N. P. Smart, Elliptic curves in cryptography, London
    Mathematical Society Lecture Note Series, vol. 265, Cambridge University Press,
    Cambridge, 2000.
 4. David A. Cox, Primes of the form x2 + ny 2 , A Wiley-Interscience Publication,
    John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York, 1989.
 5. Giuliana Davidoff, Peter Sarnak, and Alain Valette, Elementary number theory,
    group theory, and Ramanujan graphs, London Mathematical Society Student Texts,
    vol. 55, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2003.
 6. Pierre Deligne, La conjecture de Weil. I , Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math.
    (1974), 273–307. (French)
 7. Pierre Deligne and Jean-Pierre Serre, Formes modulaires de poids 1, Ann. Sci.
    École Norm. Sup. (4) 7 (1974), 507–530 (1975). (French)
 8. Max Deuring, Die Typen der Multiplikatorenringe elliptischer Funktionenkörper ,
    Abh. Math. Sem. Hansischen Univ. 14 (1941), 197–272. (German)
 9. Martin Eichler, Quaternäre quadratische Formen und die Riemannsche Vermutung
    für die Kongruenzzetafunktion, Arch. Math. 5 (1954), 355–366. (German)
10. Mireille Fouquet and François Morain, Isogeny volcanoes and the SEA algorithm,
    Algorithmic Number Theory (Sydney, 2002), Lecture Notes in Comput. Sci.,
    vol. 2369, Springer, Berlin, 2002, pp. 276–291.


                                         21
Jao, Miller, and Venkatesan                           Difficulty of Discrete Log

11. Steven D. Galbraith, Constructing isogenies between elliptic curves over finite
    fields, LMS J. Comput. Math. 2 (1999), 118–138 (electronic).
12. Steven D. Galbraith, Florian Hess, and Nigel P. Smart, Extending the GHS Weil
    descent attack , Advances in Cryptology—EUROCRYPT 2002 (Amsterdam), Lec-
    ture Notes in Comput. Sci., vol. 2332, Springer, Berlin, 2002, pp. 29–44.
13. P. Gaudry, F. Hess, and N. P. Smart, Constructive and destructive facets of Weil
    descent on elliptic curves, J. Cryptology 15 (2002), 19–46.
14. Stephen S. Gelbart and Stephen D. Miller, Riemann’s zeta function and beyond ,
    Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. (N.S.) 41 (2004), 59–112 (electronic).
15. Benedict H. Gross, Heights and the special values of L-series, Number Theory
    (Montreal, Que., 1985), CMS Conf. Proc., vol. 7, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence,
    RI, 1987, pp. 115–187.
16. D. Harkins and D. Carrel, The Internet key exchange (IKE), Technical Report
    IETF RFC 2409, November 1998, http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2409.txt.
17. Jun-ichi Igusa, Fibre systems of Jacobian varieties. III. Fibre systems of elliptic
    curves, Amer. J. Math. 81 (1959), 453–476.
18. Yasutaka Ihara, Discrete subgroups of PL(2, k℘ ), Algebraic Groups and Discontin-
    uous Subgroups (Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., Boulder, Colo., 1965), Amer. Math.
    Soc., Providence, R.I., 1966, pp. 272–278.
19. Henryk Iwaniec, Topics in classical automorphic forms, Graduate Studies in Math-
    ematics, vol. 17, American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 1997.
20. Henryk Iwaniec and Emmanuel Kowalski, Analytic number theory, American
    Mathematical Society Colloquium Publications, vol. 53, American Mathematical
    Society, Providence, RI, 2004.
21. M. Jerrum and A. Sinclair, Conductance and the rapid mixing property for Markov
    chains: the approximation of permanent resolved , ACM Symposium on Theory of
    Computing (May 1988), 235–243.
22. Neal Koblitz, Elliptic curve cryptosystems, Math. Comp. 48 (1987), 203–209.
23. David Kohel, Endomorphism rings of elliptic curves over finite fields, University
    of California, Berkeley, 1996 (Ph.D thesis).
24. Serge Lang, Elliptic functions, 2nd ed., Graduate Texts in Mathematics, vol. 112,
    Springer-Verlag, New York, 1987, With an appendix by J. Tate.
25. H. W. Lenstra Jr., Factoring integers with elliptic curves, Ann. of Math. (2) 126
    (1987), 649–673.
26. Reynald Lercier, Computing isogenies in F2n , Algorithmic Number Theory (Tal-
    ence, 1996), Lecture Notes in Comput. Sci., vol. 1122, Springer, Berlin, 1996,
    pp. 197–212.
27. R. Lercier and F. Morain, Algorithms for computing isogenies between ellip-
    tic curves, Computational Perspectives on Number Theory (Chicago, IL, 1995),
    AMS/IP Stud. Adv. Math., vol. 7, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1998, pp. 77–
    96.
28. Alexander Lubotzky, Discrete groups, expanding graphs and invariant measures,
    Progress in Mathematics, vol. 125, Birkhäuser Verlag, Basel, 1994.
29. A. Lubotzky, R. Phillips, and P. Sarnak, Ramanujan graphs, Combinatorica 8
    (1988), 261–277.
30. Alfred J. Menezes, Tatsuaki Okamoto, and Scott A. Vanstone, Reducing elliptic
    curve logarithms to logarithms in a finite field , IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory 39
    (1993), 1639–1646.
31. Alfred J. Menezes, Paul C. van Oorschot, and Scott A. Vanstone, Handbook of
    applied cryptography, CRC Press Series on Discrete Mathematics and its Applica-
    tions, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1997, With a foreword by Ronald L. Rivest.


                                          22
Jao, Miller, and Venkatesan                           Difficulty of Discrete Log

32. Alfred Menezes, Edlyn Teske, and Annegret Weng, Weak fields for ECC , Topics
    in Cryptology—CT-RSA 2004, Lecture Notes in Comput. Sci., vol. 2964, Springer,
    Berlin, 2004, pp. 366–386.
33. J.-F. Mestre, La méthode des graphes. Exemples et applications, Proceedings of
    the international conference on class numbers and fundamental units of algebraic
    number fields (Katata, 1986), Nagoya Univ., Nagoya, 1986, pp. 217–242. (French)
34. Victor S. Miller, Use of elliptic curves in cryptography, Advances in Cryptology—
    CRYPTO ’85 (Santa Barbara, Calif., 1985), Lecture Notes in Comput. Sci.,
    vol. 218, Springer, Berlin, 1986, pp. 417–426.
35. M. Ram Murty, Problems in analytic number theory, Graduate Texts in Mathe-
    matics, vol. 206, Springer-Verlag, New York, 2001, Readings in Mathematics.
36. National Institute of Standards and Technology, Digital Signature Standard (DSS),
    Technical Report FIPS PUB 186–2, January 2000,
    http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/fips/.
37. Arnold K. Pizer, Ramanujan graphs and Hecke operators, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc.
    (N.S.) 23 (1990), 127–137.
38.         , Ramanujan graphs, Computational Perspectives on Number Theory
    (Chicago, IL, 1995), AMS/IP Stud. Adv. Math., vol. 7, Amer. Math. Soc., Provi-
    dence, RI, 1998, pp. 159–178.
39. Zeév Rudnick and Peter Sarnak, Zeros of principal L-functions and random matrix
    theory, Duke Math. J. 81 (1996), 269–322, A celebration of John F. Nash, Jr.
40. Peter Sarnak, Some applications of modular forms, Cambridge Tracts in Mathe-
    matics, vol. 99, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1990.
41. Jean-Pierre Serre, Abelian l-adic representations and elliptic curves, McGill Uni-
    versity lecture notes written with the collaboration of Willem Kuyk and John
    Labute, W. A. Benjamin, Inc., New York-Amsterdam, 1968.
42. Joseph H. Silverman, The arithmetic of elliptic curves, Graduate Texts in Mathe-
    matics, vol. 106, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1994.
43. John Tate, Endomorphisms of abelian varieties over finite fields, Invent. Math. 2
    (1966), 134–144.
44. Gérald Tenenbaum, Introduction to analytic and probabilistic number theory, Cam-
    bridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics, vol. 46, Cambridge University Press,
    Cambridge, 1995, Translated from the second French edition (1995) by C. B.
    Thomas.
45. Edlyn Teske, An elliptic curve trapdoor system (extended abstract), High Primes
    and Misdemeanours: Lectures in Honour of the 60th Birthday of Hugh Cowie
    Williams, Fields Inst. Commun., vol. 41, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2004,
    pp. 341–352.
46. Lawrence C. Washington, Elliptic curves, Discrete Mathematics and its Applica-
    tions (Boca Raton), Chapman & Hall/CRC, Boca Raton, FL, 2003.



A      Supersingular Case
In this appendix we discuss the isogeny graphs for supersingular el-
liptic curves and prove Theorem 1.1 in this setting. The isogeny
graphs were first considered by Mestre [33], and were shown by
Pizer [37, 38] to have the Ramanujan property. Curiously, the actual

                                         23
Jao, Miller, and Venkatesan                  Difficulty of Discrete Log

graphs were first described by Ihara [18] in 1965, but not noticed to
be examples of expander graphs until much later. We have decided
to give an account here for completeness, mainly following Pizer’s ar-
guments. The isogeny graphs we will present here differ from those
in the ordinary case in that they are directed. This will cause no
serious practical consequences, because one can arrange that only
a bounded number of edges in these graphs will be unaccompanied
by a reverse edge. Also, the implication about rapid mixing used for
Theorem 1.1 carries over as well in the directed setting with almost
no modification. It is instructive to compare the proofs for the ordi-
nary and supersingular cases, in order to see how GRH plays a role
analogous to the Ramanujan conjectures.
    Every F̄q -isomorphism class of supersingular elliptic curves in
characteristic p is defined over either Fp or Fp2 [42], so it suffices
to fix Fq = Fp2 as the field of definition for this discussion. Thus, in
contrast to ordinary curves, there is a finite bound g on the number
of isomorphism classes that can belong to any given isogeny class
(this bound is in fact the genus of the modular curve X0 (p), which is
roughly p+1
          12
             ). It turns out that all isomorphism classes of supersin-
gular curves defined over Fp2 belong to the same isogeny class [33].
Because the number of supersingular curves up to isomorphism is so
much smaller than the number of ordinary curves up to isomorphism,
correspondingly fewer of the edges need to be included in order to
form a Ramanujan graph. For a fixed prime value of ℓ 6= p, we define
the vertices of the supersingular isogeny graph G to consist of these
g isomorphism classes, with directed edges indexed by equivalence
classes of degree-ℓ isogenies as defined below. In fact, we will prove
that G is a directed k√= ℓ + √1-regular graph satisfying the Ramanu-
jan bound of |λ| ≤ 2 ℓ = 2 k − 1 for the nontrivial eigenvalues of
its adjacency matrix. The degree ℓ in particular may be taken to be
as small as 2 or 3.
    For the definition of the equivalence classes of isogenies — as
well as later for the proofs — we now need to recall the structure
of the endomorphism rings of supersingular elliptic curves. In con-
trast to the ordinary setting (Section 2), the endomorphism ring
End(E) is a maximal order in the quaternion algebra R = Qp,∞
ramified at p and ∞. Moreover, isomorphism classes of supersingu-
lar curves Ei isogenous to E are in 1-1 correspondence with the left

                                  24
Jao, Miller, and Venkatesan                           Difficulty of Discrete Log

ideal classes Ii := Hom(Ei , E) of R. As in Section 2.1, call two iso-
genies φ1 , φ2 : Ei → Ej equivalent if there exists an automorphism α
of Ej such that φ2 = αφ1 . Under this relation, the set of equivalence
classes of isogenies from Ei to Ej is equal to Ij−1 Ii modulo the units
of Ij . This correspondence is degree preserving, in the sense that the
degree of an isogeny equals the reduced norm of the corresponding
element in Ij−1 Ii , normalized by the norm of Ij−1 Ii itself. This is the
notion of equivalence class of isogenies referred to in the definition of
G in the previous paragraph. Thus, for any integer n, the generating
function for the number Mij (n) of equivalence classes of degree n
isogenies from Ei to Ej (i.e., the number of edges between vertices
representing elliptic curves Ei and Ej ) is given by
            ∞
            X                      1      X                       −1
                  Mij (n) q n :=                      q N (α)/N (Ij Ii ) ,   (A.1)
            n=0
                                   ej
                                        α ∈ Ij−1 Ii


where ej is the number of units in Ij (equivalently, the number of
automorphisms of Ej ). One knows that ej ≤ 6, and in fact ej = 2
except for at most two values of j – see the further remarks at the
end of this appendix. Proofs for the statements in this paragraph
can be found in [15, 38].
   The θ-series on the righthand side of (A.1) is a weight 2 modular
form for the congruence subgroup Γ0 (p), and the matrices
                                                  
                             M11 (n) · · · M1g (n)
                  B(n) :=  ...       ..
                                         .
                                             .. 
                           
                                              . 
                               Mg1 (n) · · · Mgg (n)

(called Brandt matrices) are simultaneously both the n-th Fourier
coefficients of various modular forms, as well the adjacency matrices
for the graph G. A fundamental property of the Brandt matrices
B(n) is that they represent the action of the nth Hecke operator
T (n) on a certain basis of modular forms of weight 2 for Γ0 (p) (see
[37]). Thus the eigenvalues of B(n) are given by the nth coefficients
of the weight-2 Hecke eigenforms for Γ0 (p). These eigenforms include
a single Eisenstein series, with the rest being cusp forms. Now we
suppose that n = ℓ is prime (mainly in order to simplify the following
statements). The nth Hecke eigenvalue of the Eisenstein series is n+1,

                                   25
Jao, Miller, and Venkatesan                  Difficulty of Discrete Log
                                                                    √
while those of the cusp forms are bounded in absolute value by 2 n
according to the Ramanujan conjectures (in this case a theorem of
Eichler [9] and Igusa [17]). Thus the adjacency matrix of G has trivial
eigenvalue equal to ℓ+1 (the degree k), and its √nontrivial eigenvalues
indeed satisfy the Ramanujan bound |λ| ≤ 2 k − 1.
    Finally, we conclude with some comments about the potential
asymmetry of the matrix B(n). This is due to the asymmetry in the
definition of equivalence classes of isogenies. Indeed, if Aut(E1 ) and
Aut(E2 ) are different, then two isogenies E1 → E2 can sometimes be
equivalent even when their dual isogenies are not equivalent. This
problem arises
           √ only if one of the curves Ei has complex multiplication
by either −1 or e2πi/3 , since otherwise the only possible automor-
phisms of Ei are the scalar multiplication maps ±1 [42, §III.10]. In
the supersingular setting, one can avoid curves with such unusually
rich automorphism
           √         groups by choosing a characteristic p which splits
in both Z[ −1] and Z[e2πi/3 ], i.e., p ≡ 1 mod 12 (see [37, Prop. √
                                                                  4.6]).
In the case of ordinary curves, however, the quadratic orders Z[ −1]
and Z[e2πi/3 ] both have class number 1, which then renders the issue
moot because the isogeny graphs corresponding to these levels each
have only one node.




                                  26
