Assessing the Impact of a Variant of MATZOV’s Dual Attack
on Kyber
Kevin Carrier, Charles Meyer-Hilfiger, Yixin Shen, Jean-Pierre Tillich

To cite this version:
Kevin Carrier, Charles Meyer-Hilfiger, Yixin Shen, Jean-Pierre Tillich. Assessing the Impact of a Variant of
MATZOV’s Dual Attack on Kyber. CRYPTO 2025 - 45th Annual International Cryptology Conference, Aug
2025, Santa Barbara, United States. pp.1-36, ⟨10.1007/978-3-032-01855-7_15⟩. ⟨hal-05406481⟩

HAL Id: hal-05406481
https://hal.science/hal-05406481v1
Submitted on 9 Dec 2025

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive
for the deposit and dissemination of scientific research documents, whether they are published or not.
The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non, émanant
des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche
français ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou
privés.

Distributed under a Creative Commons CC BY 4.0 - Attribution - International License

Assessing the Impact of a Variant of MATZOV’s Dual
Attack on Kyber
Kevin Carrier1 , Charles Meyer-Hilfiger2 , Yixin Shen3 , and Jean-Pierre Tillich2
1

ETIS UMR 8051,CY Cergy-Paris Université, ENSEA, CNRS, kevin.carrier@cyu.fr
2
Project COSMIQ, Inria de Paris,
charles.meyer-hilfiger@inria.fr,jean-pierre.tillich@inria.fr
3
Univ. Rennes, Inria, CNRS, IRISA, Rennes, France yixin.shen@inria.fr ⋆

Abstract. The dual attacks on the Learning With Errors (LWE) problem are currently a
subject of controversy. In particular, the results of [MAT22], which claim to significantly
lower the security level of Kyber [SAB+ 20], a lattice-based cryptosystem currently being
standardized by NIST, are not widely accepted. The analysis behind their attack depends on
a series of assumptions that, in certain scenarios, have been shown to contradict established
theorems or well-tested heuristics [DP23b].
In this paper, we introduce a new dual lattice attack on LWE, drawing from ideas in coding
theory. Our approach revisits the dual attack proposed by [MAT22], replacing modulus
switching with an efficient decoding algorithm. This decoding is achieved by generalizing
polar codes over Zq , and we confirm their strong distortion properties through benchmarks.
This modification enables a reduction from small-LWE to plain-LWE, with a notable decrease
in the secret dimension. Additionally, we replace the enumeration step in the attack by
assuming the secret is zero for the portion being enumerated, iterating this assumption over
various choices for the enumeration part.
We make an analysis of our attack without using the flawed independence assumptions used
in [MAT22] and we fully back up our analysis with experimental evidences.
Lastly, we assess the complexity of our attack on Kyber; showing that the security levels
for Kyber-512/768/1024 are 3.5/11.9/12.3 bits below the NIST requirements (143/207/272
bits) in the same nearest-neighbor cost model as in [SAB+ 20,MAT22]. All in all the cost of
our attack matches and even slightly beat in some cases the complexities originally claimed
by the attack of [MAT22].
Keywords: Post-Quantum Cryptography · Learning With Errors · Dual Attack · Fast
Fourier Transform · Polar Code

1

Introduction

1.1

Background

The LWE Problem. In this paper, we address the Learning With Errors (LWE) problem originally
introduced by Regev in [Reg05]. It revolves around the task of finding s ∈ Znq given (A, b) ∈
Zm×n
× Zm
q
q with b = As + e where e is of small Euclidean norm. This problem can be seen as the
△

decoding problem for the code C(A) generated by the columns of A (i.e. C(A) = {Ax, x ∈ Znq })
and the Euclidean distance, where we are asked to find the codeword (i.e. the element of C) which
is close in Euclidean distance to b. We are particularly interested in the case where s is short too
which is called the small LWE problem. This problem has emerged as a fundamental challenge in
cryptography. Notably, it underpins the construction of various cryptographic primitives and is
⋆

The work of KC and JPT was funded by the French Agence Nationale de la Recherche through ANR
JCJC DECODE (ANR-22-CE39-0004-01) for KC and ANR-22-PETQ-0008 PQ-TLS for JPT. The work
of CMH was funded by the French Agence de l’innovation de défense and by Inria. The work of YS
was funded by EPSRC grant EP/W02778X/2 and the France 2030 program managed by the French
National Research Agency under grant agreement ANR-22-PETQ-0008 PQ-TLS.

conjectured to withstand attacks from quantum computers [LPR10]. Our motivation for exploring
this problem stems particularly from the need to gauge the security level of Kyber, a lattice-based
cryptosystem that is being standardized by the NIST4 .
Dual Attacks. The most efficient cryptanalysis techniques against LWE(-like) problems are “primal” and “du