, given by each dual vector, are
mutually independent.
We approach the analysis of this heuristic by looking at the conclusions it leads to.
The geometric point of view offered by the work of Laarhoven and Walter [31] is pivotal
in that respect: judging the reasonability of a heuristic conclusion is very much enabled
by the language of geometry. In particular, [31] concludes with a heuristic algorithm
that solves decision-BDD, even when the noise slightly exceeds the Gaussian Heuristic
(GH), i.e., the expected minimal distance of a random lattice. This should raise suspicion,
as a random point is on average not expected to be further than GH away from the lattice.
We show this suspicion is fair: it easily follows from a result of Debris, Ducas, Resch, and
Tillich [16] that the above task is statistically impossible to solve, even to an unbounded
attacker.
The contradiction above is, however, limited to a rather theoretical regime of the DualSieve attack, which is not that of the recent concrete cryptanalytic claims [6,14,23,27,
33], where the noise is below GH. Still, here the attack needs to distinguish between a
BDD sample and a uniform sample with a very high success probability. We will show
that this situation also leads to a contradiction.
Namely, we argue that the heuristic probability of having a distinguishing failure is
much smaller than the probability of a uniform target lying closer to the lattice than a
BDD target. The claimed high success probability of distinguishing between BDD and
uniform contradicts the basic principle that targets closer to the lattice get a higher score
in expectation. It turns out that the parameters used in [27,33] specifically fall into that
contradictory regime that requires a distinguisher with a very high success probability.
Experimental invalidation of the Prior Model (Sect. 5). To develop a more precise
understanding, we zoom in on the score distribution for BDD targets and uniform targets.
Extensive experiments were performed to discover that both distributions deviate from
the predictions made under the Independent Score Heuristic. First, the body of the
distribution of scores for uniform targets is properly predicted, but not its tail: after a
predicted rapid decrease, visually resembling a waterfall, this distribution hits a floor.
This is perfectly in line with our second contradictory regime: some uniform targets will
be close to the lattice, and should therefore have a high score.
The score distribution for BDD targets is also mispredicted, and this is no longer just
a matter of the tail. Contrary to prediction, this distribution is not Gaussian-like. It is
in fact not even symmetric around its average, and its variance appears exponentially
larger than predicted. In particular, a BDD target will more likely have a low score than
what is heuristically predicted.

8

Page 4 of 51

L. Ducas, L. N. Pulles

Accurate Score Distribution models (Sect. 6) The mispredictions caused by the Independent Score Heuristic show there is some correlation between the inner products w, t
(mod 1), so the situation may be resolved by identifying the confounding variable that
causes dependencies. In this case, the confounding variable seems to be the target t, or
more precisely its norm t. For example, scaling the target by a factor α, multiplies
all the inner products by α together. Indeed, by fixing the confounding variable t,
one may more reasonably hope the inner products w, t (mod 1) become independent
again.
In contrast to existing literature, we do not approximate the distribution of lattice
sieve vectors by a Gaussian distributio

--- selected locus ---

encies. In this case, the confounding variable seems to be the target t, or
more precisely its norm t. For example, scaling the target by a factor α, multiplies
all the inner products by α together. Indeed, by fixing the confounding variable t,
one may more reasonably hope the inner products w, t (mod 1) become independent
again.
In contrast to existing literature, we do not approximate the distribution of lattice
sieve vectors by a Gaussian distribution [33, Assumption 4.4]. Instead, we model them
in Heuristic 2.13 as being uniform in a ball, which describes lattice sieve vectors much
more accurately. This somewhat complicates the Fourier analysis, but is feasible thanks
to the well-known Bessel functions.
Fixing the target t leads very naturally to studying the score distribution of t taken
over the randomness of the lattice and the set of short dual vectors. For this target, we
derive a novel analytic expression for the expectation value and variance of the score
distribution. Note that in this case, each individual score has the same individual score
distribution, so we can resort to a central limit heuristic—which seems reasonable as
there are exponentially many dual vectors—to reason about the sum of individual scores,
being normally distributed.
While the case of a particular target is of limited interest in our context, the analysis
can be easily extended to any other radial distribution, e.g., Gaussian or uniform in a
ball.
Although it is notoriously hard to determine the exact shape of the Voronoi cell
[30], one can roughly approximate the Voronoi cell by a ball of same volume. This in
turn approximates the uniform target distribution by a radial distribution, which allows
predicting the score distribution for uniform targets using the above prediction.
Validating the New Model (Sect. 7). The overall approach remains heuristic, but the
previously identified issues have now been sidestepped, and we further confirm those
score distribution predictions with extensive experiments. All the predictions that are
made throughout this work have been extensively tested by large experiments to verify
whether the proposed heuristics are reasonable in the context of solving decision-BDD.
The predicted score distributions for sphere, ball and Gaussian BDD targets are shown
in Fig. 6, in dimension 90. In addition, the predicted score distribution for uniform targets
is shown in Fig. 8. This figure contains data of experiments in dimensions 40, 50, 60 and
70, each based on 248 samples. Lastly, Fig. 9 shows the score distribution for uniform
targets when using a larger saturation radius inside lattice sieving. Here, our predictions
show that the “waterfall-floor” phenomenon√could be observed with fewer samples,
compared to the default saturation radius of 4/3, which the experiments confirm.
Open data. All the written code and the obtained data to generate the figures, can be
found in the two following GitHub repositories:
1. https://github.com/ludopulles/DoesDualSieveWork,
2. https://github.com/ludopulles/AccurateScorePredictionDualSieveAttacks

The experiments are written in Python and use the G6K and FPyLLL libraries
[5,47], and there is a binding to some C code to accelerate the FFT.

Accurate Score Prediction for Dual-Sieve Attacks

Page 5 of 51

8

1.2. Conclusion
Our theoretical contradictions and our experiments both demonstrate that the Independent Score Heuristic, underlying the prior standard analysis of the Dual-Sieve attack, is
invalid. Two independent phenomena uncovered by the experiments point to the success
probability of the Dual-Sieve attac

--- selected locus ---

https://github.com/ludopulles/AccurateScorePredictionDualSieveAttacks

The experiments are written in Python and use the G6K and FPyLLL libraries
[5,47], and there is a binding to some C code to accelerate the FFT.

Accurate Score Prediction for Dual-Sieve Attacks

Page 5 of 51

8

1.2. Conclusion
Our theoretical contradictions and our experiments both demonstrate that the Independent Score Heuristic, underlying the prior standard analysis of the Dual-Sieve attack, is
invalid. Two independent phenomena uncovered by the experiments point to the success
probability of the Dual-Sieve attack (with or without FFT) being presumably overestimated by this Independent Score Heuristic, at least in certain regimes of interest.
In particular, the concrete cryptanalytic claims of numerous works, including [6,7,14,
23,27,33], should be considered at least unsubstantiated, as these are currently based on
this flawed heuristic. Still, some of those claims might not be that far from reality, but
those of [6,14,27,33] are so deep in the contradictory regime that these are presumably
significantly far away from reality.
In addition, after identifying the norm of the target t as a confounding variable
in the individual scores, we propose alternative heuristics in which this confounding
variable is fixed. This leads us to predict the score distributions for both BDD targets
and uniform targets in the Dual-Sieve attack. The newly derived heuristic predictions
are tested in extensive experiments, which reveal that the predictions are rather accurate
compared to experimental data.
In conclusion, the experiments strongly suggest that Heuristics 2.13, 6.5 and 6.11 are
very reasonable to use while analyzing dual attacks. The precise effectiveness of the
state-of-the-art dual attack remains as future work.
1.3. Concurrent Work
During the writing process of this paper, we became aware of several concurrent works
[13,40,41,49].
The work of Wiemers, Ehlen and Bashiri [49] proposed an analysis of the variance
of the score of the actual BDD target and the uniform targets. They use a significantly
different approach, and obtain predictions compatible with the experimental data from
Sect. 5.3. This does not directly allow to conclude on false-negative nor false-positive
rates, as it does not fully characterize the distribution.
The work of Pouly and Shen [41] proposed a provable variant of the dual attack,
using discrete Gaussian sampling in place of sieving vectors. Notably, their provable
regime does not intersect the heuristic contradictory regime in Sect. 4.3. In fact, and
quite interestingly, both regimes are separated by a constant factor of 2 on the length of
the BDD target. In a follow-up work in progress, they are also considering uniform dual
vectors in a ball [40].
The work of Carrier, Debris, Meyer-Hilfiger and Tillich, while mostly focusing on the
case of statistical decoding for codes, also includes a short section on the case of lattices
[13, Sect. 8]. More specifically, they propose a prediction for the floor phenomenon for
uniform targets modulo the lattice, also using Bessel functions. They use a somewhat
comparable but not identical reasoning and derivations as that of our Sect. 6.4.
1.4. Analogies with Coding Theory
The dual attack in lattices is called “statistical decoding” in coding theory and dates back
to the works of [3,25,39]. Here, with the use of many low-weight parity-check equations

8

Page 6 of 51

L. Ducas, L. N. Pulles

H (analogous with short dual vectors for lattices), similarly one can decide whether a
target t in Fqn is close to some cod