analysis of [BDGL16] assumes an ideal case, underestimating the decoding cost and overlooking
the suboptimal rate-distortion of product codes. Specifically, [Duc22] estimates that for a sieving
dimension of 380, the complexity of the nearest-neighbor search increases by a factor of about26.
Here we kept the same way of computing the costs as in Matzov’s paper [MAT22] to keep a fair
comparison with their work. Delving further into this topic and replacing for instance the simple
product codes with a better approach is outside the scope of this work.
For the same reasons, we only consider the classical RAM model. Adapting our analysis to
a more realistic memory access model, such as the one presented in [Jaq24], is left as future
work. Furthermore, we do not compare our results with the state-of-the-art primal attacks. A
fair comparison would require substantial effort, as it involves accounting for many confounding
factors, such as those listed in [DP23b, Appendix A]. Achieving a more precise estimate – down
to the gate count level, as done for instance in [SAB+20] – would demand a significantly more
in-depth analysis, which we leave as future work given the already considerable length of this
paper. Once again, our goal here is to provide a proof of concept for dual lattice attacks and to
help resolve the controversy surrounding them. In line with this objective, we deliberately chose
to work with a relatively simple and likely suboptimal dual attack algorithm. There are several
potential avenues for improving it, including: (i) allowing false positives and adding a verification
step to filter them out, (ii) combining modulus switching with our technique, as it would enable
computations in characteristic 2, thereby allowing for a much more efficient fast Fourier transform,
(iii) replacing the naive product code in the sieving procedure by a better quantizer... We leave
these improvements for future work, as they fall outside the scope of this paper.
Evaluating the Complexity of our Dual Attack.We optimize the time complexity of Al-
gorithm 3.1, as established in Theorem 4.1, under the assumptions outlined in Lemma 3.2. We
assume that 1 − µ ≈ 1, and we constrain the parametersN and T such that ε := R Pwrong qkfft
remains close to 1; in particular, in our setting,η is always greater than0.62. Additionally, we
select T following Approximation 4.8, ensuring thatPgood ≈ 1
2. At the same time, we ensure thatε
remains close to0. These choices guarantee that the overall success probability14 of our algorithm
is lower-bounded by approximately0.31 − ε ≈ 0.31.
Our complexity results are summarized in the last three columns of Table 5.1. The associated
parameters are given in Appendix C, Table C.1 and some relevant intermediate quantities are
summarized in Appendix C, Table C.2. Note that the quantity dlat is defined from the other
parameters as in Lemma 2.8. The meanµlsc of the decoding distancedlsc and its standard deviation
σlsc are computed by choosing an[nfft, kfft]q polar code and by decoding many (a thousand) random
wordsof Znfft
q .Forallinstancesof Kyber,weusedalistsizeof L = 1inthedecoder(seeSection3.3,
Lemma 3.3). This list size allows us to achieve a decoding distance close enough to the optimal
decoding distancedGV
△
= p nfft
2πe q1−
kfft
nfft without incurring additional cost in the complexity. Finally,
we provide in the GitHub repository15 a file verifying that our parameters achieve the complexity
claims and verify all the constraints.
Acknowledgment
We would like to thank Léo Ducas for helpful discussions and for pointing out, in an older version
of the paper, that we made an error by overlooking the fact that MATZOV sieving is performed
on a sublattice rather than the full lattice.
14 Note that in [MAT22], this success probability was approximately0.25.
15 https://github.com/kevin-carrier/CodedDualAttack/tree/main/OptimizeCodedDualAttack
26