     Superposition Meet-in-the-Middle Attacks:
    Updates on Fundamental Security of AES-like
                     Hashing

    Zhenzhen Bao2,3 , Jian Guo2 , Danping Shi1,4(B) , and Yi Tu2 
1
    State Key Laboratory of Information Security, Institute of Information Engineering,
          Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China shidanping@iie.ac.cn
  2
     School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University,
                                        Singapore
       baozhenzhen10@gmail.com, guojian@ntu.edu.sg, TUYI0002@e.ntu.edu.sg
     3
       Institute for Network Sciences and Cyberspace, BNRist, Tsinghua University,
                                     Beijing, China
4
    School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China



       Abstract. The Meet-in-the-Middle approach is one of the most power-
       ful cryptanalysis techniques, demonstrated by its applications in preim-
       age attacks on the full MD4, MD5, Tiger, HAVAL, and Haraka-512 v2 hash
       functions, and key recovery of the full block cipher KTANTAN. The suc-
       cess relies on the separation of a primitive into two independent chunks,
       where each active cell of the state is used to represent only one chunk
       or is otherwise considered unusable once mixed. We observe that some
       of such cells are linearly mixed and can be as useful as the independent
       ones. This leads to the introduction of superposition states and a whole
       suite of accompanied techniques, which we incorporate into the MILP-
       based search framework proposed by Bao et al. at EUROCRYPT 2021
       and Dong et al. at CRYPTO 2021, and ﬁnd applications on a wide range
       of AES-like hash functions and block ciphers.
       Keywords: Whirlpool, Grøstl, AES hashing modes, MITM, MILP


1    Introduction
Hash function is a function mapping a document of arbitrary length into a short
ﬁxed-length digest. For a cryptographically secure hash function, it should fulﬁll
three basic security requirements: collision resistance, preimage resistance, and
second-preimage resistance. In this paper, we focus on the security notion of
preimage and collision resistance, i.e., it should be computationally diﬃcult to
invert the function or ﬁnd two inputs map to the same digest. Specially, for
an ideal hash function H with n-bit digest and a target T given at random, it
should cost no less than 2n compression function evaluations to ﬁnd an input x
such that H(x) = T . Preimage attack refers to an algorithm achieving this in
lesser evaluations. Collision attack refers to an algorithm ﬁnding diﬀerent x and
x′ such that H(x) = H(x′ ) with lesser evaluations than birthday attack, i.e.,
2n/2 computations.
   Traditionally, there are two common methods to construct cryptographic
hash functions. One is to convert from block ciphers through mode of operations,
and the other is to build from scratch. There are 12 secure PGV modes [25],
which enjoy the proof of security reduction of the hash function to the underlying
block cipher. This method is especially useful when a block cipher like AES [9]
has long-standing security against intensive cryptanalysis. When it is already
implemented for other purposes like encryption, the same implementation can
be re-used to construct a hash function by implementing the additional mode
only. In this way it also leads to performance merits. Particularly, hash function
constructed from AES through PGV modes are called AES hashing, and they
have been standardized by Zigbee [1] and also suggested by ISO/IEC [19]. Due
to the well understood security and high performance, many dedicated block
ciphers and hash functions built from scratch follow similar design strategy by
using an AES-like round function, such as Whirlpool [6], Grøstl [12], PHOTON [15],
and LED [16] etc.

The Meet-in-the-Middle (MITM) attack has a long history and an im-
portant role in various cryptanalysis on various primitives. It was introduced
to preimage attacks on hash functions by Aumasson et al. [3] and Sasaki et
al. [27] in 2008. Since then, MITM preimage attack has shown its power on
many MD/SHA families of hash functions. That includes the full versions of
MD4 [14], MD5 [29], Tiger [14, 32], and HAVAL [17, 27], as well as lightweight
block cipher KTANTAN [7, 33].
    The basic MITM idea is to ﬁnd ways to split the cipher into two computa-
tional chunks and ﬁnd the so-called neutral bits from each side, independent of
the computation of the state of the other side. Hence, the two chunks can be
computed independently but end up at a common state, where previously in-
dependent computations are ﬁnally pairwise matched. The critical point is that
the independence between the two chunks allows their results to be pairwise
matchable, enabling this MITM procedure to require fewer computations than
a trivial enumeration.
    In 2011, MITM was introduced by Sasaki [26] for the ﬁrst time to preim-
age attack on AES hashing, invalidating the preimage resistance of the 7-round
reduced version. To avoid dealing with the key schedule, the key value of AES
was pre-set to a constant, and hence the same number of rounds was attacked
for AES hashing based on all three versions of AES (AES-128, AES-192, and
AES-256). In 2019, the attack was revisited in [4], and it was found that the
degree of freedoms from the key values can be utilized for at least one side of
the computation. This observation led to the attack complexity improvements
over 7-round AES-128 hashing, and increased the number of attacked rounds
from 7 to 8 for the AES-hashing based on AES-192 and AES-256. In 2020, the
MITM preimage attack was introduced to meet a popular automatic tool, the
Mixed-Integer-Linear-Programming (MILP) [5]. This match with MILP enables
the previously invented enhancements for MITM, e.g., the initial structure, the
selection and cancellation of neutral bits, to evolve to a more generalized form.


                                        2
The MILP models characterizing the generalized formalization of MITM, pro-
duced many improved preimage attacks on AES hashing, penetrated 8-round
AES-128 hashing and full rounds of Haraka v2-512. In 2021, MITM-MILP mod-
els ﬁnd more applications not only in preimage attacks but also in key-recovery
and collision attacks on AES-like ciphers [10].
    A common practice in all these MITM attacks is the byte-oriented decompo-
sition of states, i.e., each useful byte carries the inﬂuence of neutral bits from
at most one direction. Once inﬂuences of neutral bits from both directions reach
the same byte, this byte will be considered unusable for the either chunk. An
immediate consequence of this practice is that the information from unusable
bytes is lost, and any byte in the subsequent round computed from it becomes
unusable too.

1.1   Our Contribution
Superposition Meet-in-the-Middle Attack Framework. In this work, dif-
ferent from the byte-oriented decomposition, we propose Superposition MITM
attack framework with the help of Superposition State (SupP), under which
every byte is viewed as a combination of two virtual bytes separately represent-
ing the inﬂuence of the neutral bits from one direction each. It becomes obvious
to see that, the advantage of this representation is the preservation of linearity,
i.e., any state which is a linear combination of neutral bits from both directions
will be kept so when linear operations such as MixColumns and AddRoundKey are
applied. SupP opens up the possibility of new local collisions between/within the
encryption and key states, thus maximizes the chances of canceling impacts on
independence and enables new MITM attack conﬁgurations. Enabled by SupP,
a suite of techniques is added into the MILP-based search framework proposed
by Bao et al. [5] and Dong et al. [10], which greatly enlarged the solution space
and led to rich results on AES-like ciphers.

Guess-and-Determine (GnD) is a popular technique and has countless ap-
plications in cryptanalysis against symmetric-key primitives such as stream ci-
phers [35] and block ciphers [8]. The basic idea is that, in the process of some
attack, the gain of guessing some state or key bits is higher than the price, i.e.,
the guess itself comes with a probability p then the attack needs to repeat at
least 1/p times in order to have a correct guess. This technique has also been
used in the MITM preimage attacks [14, 30, 34], where the guess allows further
computation of more state/message bits which help either extend the attack to
more rounds or lower the time complexities. It is noted that GnD has never been
incorporated into the MILP models for the MITM attacks in [5, 10].

Bi-direction Attribute-Propagation and Cancellation (BiDir). In
previous MITM attacks [4, 5, 10, 26, 30, 34], each computation chunk propagates
towards a single direction. Although the idea of adding constraints to some neu-
tral bits in order to cancel their impact on the opposite computation has already
appeared, such cancellations are only allowed in one direction in each chunk. In


                                        3
this work, we allow cancellation between neutral bytes in both directions. This
led us to attack conﬁgurations with lower time complexities.

Multiple Ways of AddRoundKey (MulAK). The identical encryption and
key-schedule of Whirlpool allows the AddRoundKey to be moved around the
MixColumns using an equivalent key state already involved in the key-schedule.
We add the ﬂexibility of key-addition at diﬀerent positions in each round into
the model, and make it possible to save the double consumption of freedom de-
grees between the encryption and key-schedule. This simple yet eﬃcient strategy
makes it possible to attack one more round on reduced Whirlpool.


Application Results. The superposition MITM attack framework aided by the
additional techniques shows its eﬀectiveness when applied to the popular AES-
like hashing Whirlpool (an ISO/IEC standard), Grøstl (a ﬁnalist of the SHA-3
competition), AES-hashing modes (widely used, e.g., AES-MMO in Zigbee proto-
cols), and tweakable block cipher SKINNY (in its way to be included in ISO/IEC
18033). Broad improvements upon the previous best results on preimage, colli-
sion, and key-recovery attacks were obtained. The updates and a comparison
with the state-of-the-art results in literature are summarized in Table 1.
    For Whirlpool, the preimage resistance of its 7-round reduced version out of
the total 10 rounds gets challenged for the ﬁrst time, a decade after MITM itself
challenging its 5-round [26] for the ﬁrst time, or GnD joining MITM challenging
its 6-rounds [30]. Meanwhile, the complexities of preimage attacks on the 5- and
6-round reduced versions are signiﬁcantly improved. The new attack on 7-round
Whirlpool relies on multiple modeling enhancements, including GnD, BiDir, and
MulAK. Noticeably, in terms of preimage resistance, the presented attack reduces
one round security margin out of the remaining four for this important target.
    For Grøstl, there are two main instances, Grøstl-256 and Grøstl-512, named
after the size of their digests. The preimage resistance of their longest attacked
variants, 6-round Grøstl-256 and 8-round Grøstl-512, get updated eight years
after [36]. Improvements with larger complexity reductions are also found on
variants with lesser rounds. The improved attacks are achieved by allowing BiDir,
in addition to the GnD. Such improvement is not possible using only MITM-GnD,
and MITM-GnD is already considered in [24, 36].
    In addition, the MILP models for searching preimage attacks can be directly
transformed into models searching for collision attacks on hash functions and key-
recovery attacks on block ciphers. With the superposition MITM-GnD models,
immediate improvements were obtained on many more targets: For Grøstl-256,
the collision resistance of its output transformation’s longest attacked version,
the 6-round, gets updated; For AES-hashing, the collision resistance of hash
functions based on AES-128 reduced to 7-round get challenged, more than a
decade after rebound attacks challenging its 6-round [13, 21], or two years after
quantum attacks challenging its 7-round version [18]. For SKINNY, the security
in terms of key-recovery attack in the single-key setting of the longest attacked


                                        4
version, 23-round SKINNY-n-3n, gets updated. Remarkably, data complexity is
drastically reduced, e.g., from 252 to 228 for SKINNY-64-192.


On the practical impact of the presented attacks. The high complexities
of some presented attacks here might look like a show-stopper for some readers.
It is important to note that the gain of the attacks over brute-force search should
be the focus and worthy of caution, e.g., 2480 may look high for attacking 7-round
Whirlpool, however this means a complexity gain by a factor of 2512−480 = 232 .
Such a gain can be preserved when one tries to truncate the output digest and the
truncated part does not inﬂuence the computation of the chunks in the MITM
procedure of the attacks. For example, the attack on 7-round Whirlpool has the
same gain if the cells in all diagonals except for the ﬁrst are truncated, which is
veriﬁed by our implementation. Truncating the output digest from large version
hash function is commonly seen in both standard usage such as SHA-512/224
and SHA-512/256, and some engineering implementations. A gain by a factor
of 232 could bring the mining eﬀorts from around 272 to 240 , which could be
disastrous for Bitcoin.

Organization. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 brieﬂy in-
troduces the AES-like hashing and MITM preimage attacks. Section 3 describes
the details of our enhanced MILP model. The application to Whirlpool and Grøstl
is given in Section 4 and 5, respectively. Section 6 brieﬂy introduces the appli-
cations to collision and key-recovery attack. Some extra details on other attacks
and ﬁgures are provided as Supplementary Material. Relevant source codes can
be found via https://github.com/MITM-AES-like.


2   AES-like Hashing and MITM Preimage Attacks

In this section, we give a brief introduction to AES-like hash function in a gen-
eral way, and describe the MITM Preimage Attacks, before we can introduce
applications in the next sections.

The AES-like hashing in our context refers to those hash functions whose com-
pression function (CF) or output transformation (OT) uses an AES-like round
function as depicted in Figure 1, where the state can be viewed as a Nrow × Ncol
matrix of c-bit cells. There are 4 general operations in order:

– SubBytes (SB) applies a non-linear substitution-box operation to each cell.
– ShiftRows (SR) cyclically shifts each row by a pre-deﬁned number of positions.
– MixColumns (MC) mixes every column, e.g., by multiplying an (MDS) matrix.
– AddRoundKey (AK) adds the round key (or round message).

For some designs, the SR and MC may work on the transpose of the matrix, i.e.,
SR on columns and MC on rows; the SR can be a cell-permutation.


                                        5
                  Table 1: Updated results on (pseudo-) preimage attacks
                                      (Pseudo-) Preimage
                                            → ←
                                             −   − →←
Cipher (Target)      #R      Time-1 Time-2 (db , dr , m               Critical Tech.              Ref.
                                             −→ ←−
                                           , dgb , dgr )

                     5/10     2416    2448       (16, 12, 16, 0, 0)   Dedicated                   [30]
                     5/10     2352    2433       (20, 20, 20, 0, 0)   MILP, BiDir, MulAK      Fig. 13
Whirlpool (Hash)
                     6/10     2448    2481       (32, 8, 32, 0, 24)   Dedicated, GnD              [30]
                     6/10     2440    2477       (9, 24, 24, 15, 0)   MILP, GnD               Fig. 12
                     7/10     2480    2497       (16, 4, 16, 0, 12)   MILP, GnD, MulAK      Fig. 3, 11
                   5/10       2192    2234.67 (8, 8, 8, 0, 0)         Dedicated              ‡ [24, 36]
                   5/10       2184    2232     (9, 9, 16, 0, 0)       MILP, BiDir          Fig. 14, 15
Grøstl-256 (CF+OT)
                   6/10       2240    2252     (8, 2, 8, 0, 6)        Dedicated, GnD         ‡ [24, 36]
                   6/10       2224    2 245.33
                                               (4, 20, 16, 12, 0)     MILP, GnD, BiDir       Fig. 5, 6
                     7/14      2416   2480       (19, 12, 19, 0, 7)   MILP, GnD, BiDir     Fig. 16, 17
Grøstl-512 (CF+OT)
                     8/14      2472   2504       (10, 10, 18, 5, 5)   Dedicated                  † [36]
                     8/14      2472   2500       (9, 5, 10, 0, 4)     MILP, GnD, BiDir       Fig. 7, 8
                     9/12     2120    2125       (1, 1, 1, 0, 0)      MILP                          [5]
AES-192 Hashing      9/12     2112    2121       (2, 2, 2, 0, 0)      MILP, SupP, BiDir        Fig. 18
                     8/10     2120    2123       (1, 4, 4, 0, 0)      Dedicated                     [4]
Kiasu-BC Hashing     9/10     2120    2125       (1, 1, 1, 0, 0)      MILP, SupP, BiDir        Fig. 19

                                        (Free-start) Collision
Cipher (Target)      #R       Time    Mem        Setting & Type       Critical Tech.              Ref.

Grøstl-256 (OT)      6/10     2124    2124       classic collision    MILP                        [10]
                     6/10     2116    2116       classic collision    MILP, BiDir              Fig. 20

Grøstl-512 (OT)      8/14     2248    2248       classic collision    MILP                        [10]
                     8/14     2244    2244       classic collision    MILP, BiDir              Fig. 21
                     6/10      256    232        classic collision  Dedicated                  [13, 21]
AES-128 Hashing      7/10     242.5   (248 )     quantum collision Dedicated                      [18]
                     7/10      256    256        classic free-start MILP, BiDir                Fig. 22
                     8/10     260 ?   260 ?      classic free-start MILP, SupP, BiDir          Fig. 25

AES-192 Hashing      6/12      256    232        classic collision    Dedicated                [13, 21]
                     9/12     256 ?   256 ?      classic free-start   MILP, SupP, BiDir        Fig. 18

AES-256 Hashing      6/14      256    232        classic collision    Dedicated                [13, 21]
                     10/14    260 ?   260 ?      classic free-start   MILP, SupP, BiDir        Fig. 26

Kiasu-BC Hashing     6/10      256    232        classic collision    Dedicated                [13, 21]
                     9/10     260 ?   260 ?      classic free-start   MILP, SupP, BiDir        Fig. 19
                                               Key-recovery
Cipher (Target)      #R       Time    Mem        Data                 Critical Tech.              Ref.

SKINNY-64-192        23/40    2188    24         252                  MILP                        [10]
                     23/40    2184    28         260                  MILP, SupP               Fig. 23
                     23/40    2188    24         228                  MILP, SupP               Fig. 24

SKINNY-128-384        23/56    2376    28       2104               MILP                            [10]
                      23/56    2368    216      2120               MILP, SupP                   Fig. 23
                                 376     8        56
                      23/56    2       2        2                  MILP, SupP                   Fig. 24
– CF: Compression Function; OT: Output Transformation; Dedicated: Dedicated method;
– Time-1 and Time-2 are complexities of pseudo-preimage and preimage attacks following the
notions in [4] when the target is a hash function, and complexities of inverting OT and CF+OT
(pseudo-preimage) following the notions in [34] for Grøstl, respectively.
– † The presented complexities for the attacks in [36] are recomputed by removing constant factors
(e.g., the cost CT L for lookup table is replaced by 1) and replacing C2 (2n, b) that is lower bounded
by b/2 in [34] with C2 (2n, b) that can be 20 considering the amortized complexity. Thus, all
complexities are computed follow the same way.
– ‡ The 5- and 6-round attacks in [24] are on the OT of Grøstl-256. To convert to pseudo-preimage,
we used the results for the case with no truncation in [24]. However, for the 6-round attack, in
which guessing are required, it cannot be directly used. Thus, we combined the attack on OT
in [24] with the best previous attack on the CF in [36].
?
  : Only hold when assuming there exist an attacker who can generate a value of neutral bytes with
(amortized) computational complexity O(1). Currently, such an attacker has not been found for
this attack. See Remark 4 for more details.        6
                       ←
                       →KSA
                       S
                                                                          Key schedule
                                       −−→             ←−−       ←
                                                                 →ENC      Encryption
                                       End             End       S
                                               Match
                                                                                         T


       Nrow
           0   4   8   12          S   S   S    S
                                                                           AK
           1   5   9   13     SB   S   S   S    S       SR        MC
           2   6   10 14           S   S   S    S
           3   7   11 15           S   S   S    S

       c-bit   Ncol



                               Fig. 1: Overview of AES-like hashing [5]


The MITM Preimage Attacks generally cut the entire encryption process
into two chunks (forward and backward chunks), and there are few neutral bits
from each side, so that the computation of each chunk can be done independently
starting from the cutting point (starting point). The two computations end at a
common intermediate (partial) state (matching point), and the computed results
from the two sides can be pairwise matched via a linear relation.
    Since MITM has been applied to preimage attacks on MD4, MD5, and HAVAL [3,
22,27,28], it has been developed further and applied to preimage attacks on many
other hash functions. Advanced techniques in MITM preimage attacks were de-
veloped, including the splice-and-cut [2], (probabilistic) initial structure [14, 29],
and (indirect) partial matching techniques [2, 29].
    The splice-and-cut technique [2] views the input and output of the compres-
sion function connected through the feedforward operation. The initial structure
is a few consecutive starting steps, where the two chunks overlap and two sets
                               −
                               →       ←−
of neutral words (denoted by N and N ) appear simultaneously at these steps.
                                                    −
                                                    →         ←
                                                              −
Typically, one adds constraints to the values of N and N to limit their im-
pact on the opposite chunk such that steps after the initial structure (forward
                                             ←
                                             −
chunk) can be computed independently of N and steps before the initial struc-
                                                                −
                                                                →
ture (backward chunk) can be computed independently of N . The (indirect-)
partial matching exploits any easily determined relations between the computed
ending states from the two computation chunks instead of requiring values of
full states. There may or may not be any neutral bits from the message of the
compression function (or key of the underlying block cipher).

The Attack Framework. The procedure and complexity of the MITM attack
depend on how the computation is decomposed into independent chunks, how
neutral bits are selected and constrained, and how to match. Once these conﬁg-
urations have been determined, the basic MITM pseudo-preimage attack on a
CF goes as follows (with initial structure and partial matching).
 1. Assign arbitrary compatible values to all bytes except those that depend on
    the neutral bytes.


                                                             7
                                             −
                                             →       ←
                                                     −
 2. Obtain possible values of neutral bytes N and N under the constraints on
                                             −
                                             →              ←
                                                            −
    them. Suppose there are 2d1 values for N , and 2d2 for N .
                           −
                           →
 3. For all 2d1 values of N , compute forward from the initial structure to the
                                   −
                                   →
    matching point to get a table L , whose indices are the values for matching,
                                         −
                                         →
    and the elements are←  the values of N .
                           −
 4. For all 2d2 values of N , compute backward from the initial structure to the
                                   ←−
    matching point to get a table L , whose indices are the values for matching,
                                         ←
                                         −
    and the elements are the values of N .               −
                                                         →       ←
                                                                 −
 5. Check whether there is a match on indices between L and L .
 6. In case of partial-matching exist in the above step, for the surviving pairs,
    check for a full-state match. In case none of them are fully matched, repeat
    the procedure by changing values assigned in Step 1 till ﬁnd a full match.

The Attack Complexity. Denote the size of the internal state by n, the degree
of freedom in the forward and backward chunks by d1 and d2 , and the number
of bits for (partial-) matching by m, the time complexity of the attack is [4]:

             2n−(d1 +d2 ) · (2max(d1 ,d2 ) + 2d1 +d2 −m ) ≃ 2n−min(d1 ,d2 ,m) .   (1)


3     MILP Model for the Conﬁguration Search
3.1   Basic MILP Model for MITM
For searching MITM attacks using MILP, one should characterize valid attack
conﬁgurations in MILP language.
    To generate MILP models and search for the best MITM attack, the high-
level workﬂow is as follows. Given a targeted cipher, enumerate all possible com-
binations of starting and matching points (detailed in Searching Framework.).
For each combination, build the MILP model as follows: 1) claim variables in-
dicating the attribute of each state cell in the input/output of each operation
in each round, introduce necessary auxiliary variables; 2) deﬁne linear equations
and inequalities to express relations and constraints among those variables ac-
cording to the cipher speciﬁcation and attack principles; 3) write the objective
function corresponding to the optimal computational complexity. For each gen-
erated MILP model, use an MILP solver to search its optimal solution; Among
solutions of various MILP models, select the best one; parse the solution into
the attack.
    The challenging parts of the modeling are to formalize new attack settings
and techniques into explicit rules and then translate into linear inequalities/equations.
The linear inequalities/equations should be exact such that the solutions can
one-to-one correspond to valid attack conﬁgurations.
    In the following, we describe the basic modeling method following the frame-
work in [5]. As introducing the basic model, we directly introduce some natural
generalizations, while other generalizations and enhancements are deferred to
the sequel subsections.


                                             8
Notations and Encoding. For the ease of notation, the conversational coloring
scheme for describing and visualizing MITM attacks [4,5,10,26,30,34] is adopted
here to characterize the attributes of state cells. As in the MILP modeling in [5],
the attribute of individual state cell is encoded using two binary variables (x, y)
and deﬁned as follows. A cell is
• Gray ( ) if and only if its value is a predeﬁned constant, thus is known and
   ﬁxed in both forward and backward chunks; Indicating variables (x, y) = (1, 1);
• Blue ( ) if and only if its value is determined by forward neutral bytes and
   predeﬁned constants, thus is known and active in the forward chunk but
   unknown in the backward; Indicating variables (x, y) = (1, 0);
• Red ( ) if and only if its value is determined by backward neutral bytes and
   predeﬁned constants, thus is known and active in the backward chunk but
   unknown in the forward; Indicating variables (x, y) = (0, 1);
• White ( ) if and only if its value is determined by both forward and back-
   ward neutral bytes, thus can be computed independently in neither chunk;
   Indicating variables (x, y) = (0, 0).
For convenience, Black ( ) is used to represent any of the 4 cells ( , , , ).
Additionally, indicating variables β and ω are deﬁned as follows.
         {
           1 is inactive, do not contain degree of freedom; is Gray;
  – β=
           0 is active, is Blue, Red or White.
         {
           1 cannot be computed in both forward and backward chunks; is White;
  – ω=
           0 can be computed in at least one direction; is Blue, Red, or Gray.


Searching Framework. The top-level of a search for the optimal MITM at-
tacks is to enumerate all high-level conﬁgurations. A high-level conﬁguration is
                                                                     K
determined by four parameters, including totalr , initE      r , initr , and matchr ,
representing the total number of targeted rounds, the location of the initial state
in encryption, the location of the initial state in the key-schedule, and the loca-
tion of the matching point, respectively. For the complete search of totalr -round
                                                               K
attacks, all possible combinations of values of initE r , initr , and matchr should
be tried; each combination corresponds to an independent MILP model; The
following description of the modeling method is for an individual model with a
                             K
ﬁxed (totalr , initE r , initr , matchr ).
    When building an MILP model, constraints are imposed on propagation of
                                                   ←→          ←→
attributes starting from some initial states (i.e., S ENC and S KSA in round initEr
                                                             −−→       ←−−
and initK r ) and terminating at some ending states (i.e., End and End in round
matchr ) from two directions.

 – In all states in both encryption and key-schedule data-paths, constraints
   are imposed on attribute-indicating variables for state cells. The constraints
   indicate the relations of cells between consecutive states intra-round and
   inter-round. The change of attributes of cells from state to state is attribute
   propagation.


                                         9
                                                                   ←
                                                                   →             ←
                                                                                 →
 – In the initial states in encryption and key-schedule (i.e., in S ENC and S KSA ),
   the attribute of each cell is constrained to be non-White. Thus, its indicating
   variables can take three assignments, i.e., (xi , yi ) ∈ {(1, 0), (0, 1), (1, 1)} for
   ∀ i ∈ N , where N = {0, 1, · · · , Nrow · Ncol − 1}. The states in the starting
   round are called initial because initial degree of freedoms are all contained
   in these states. Denote the initial degree of freedom for the forward by −        →ι,
                                ←−
   and that for backward by ι . Accordingly, one has the equations for ι and     −
                                                                                 →
   ←−
    ι as in Eq. (2), where |BLENC |, |RDENC |, |BLKSA |, and |RDKSA | denote the
                                   ←→                           ←→
   number of Blue, Red cells in S ENC , and Blue, Red cells S KSA , respectively.
                                                      −−→        ←−−
 – In the ending states at the matching round (i.e., End and End), each column
   is associated with a general variable since the matching is performed column-
   wise. Speciﬁcally, for each pair of input/output columns of the states before
                                                      →←
   and after MixColumns, the associated variable m i indicates the degree of
   matching in column i and is constrained by the numbers of Blue, Red, and
                                                                            →←
   Gray cells. The total degree of matching of the attack, denoted as m , is the
   sum of the degrees of matching from all columns, as shown in Eq. (4).

    In order for Blue- and Red-attribute to independently propagate from initial
states to ending states and remain matchable, special constraints might be oc-
casionally imposed to indicate whether to cancel impact by consuming degrees
of freedom. Concrete constraints on how attributes propagate and how freedom
be consumed will be introduced shortly. At this moment, let’s denote the ac-
cumulated consumed degree of freedom of forward by −     →
                                                         σ and that of backward
    ←−
by σ . The remaining degrees of freedom in forward and backward (denoted
    −
    →       ←−
by db and dr , respectively) after the occasionally freedom-consuming during
                                                                       −
                                                                       →        ←−
attribute-propagation are constrained as in Eq. (3). Note that the db and dr
are the essential degrees of freedom for the attack, which determine the attack
complexity.
    According to the attack complexity in Formula 1, the search for a valid attack
                                                                       −
                                                                       → ←  − →←
corresponds to the search for a valid attribute propagation with min{ db , dr , m
} ≥ 1; the search of the optimal attack corresponds to the search with maxi-
            −
            → ←   − →←
mized min{ db , dr , m }. Thus, the objective of the search model is to maximize
a variable τObj , which is constrained by Eq. (5).

                                                                        −
                                                                         →
{                               {−                              
    −
    →
    ι = |BLENC | + |BLKSA |,
                                 → −
                                 db = →
                                      ι −−→                     τObj ≤ db ,
                                                            col −1
                                                           N∑
                                          σ,        →←      →←           ←−
    ←
    −                            ←
                                 − ←  −   ←
                                          −.        m=      mi.   τObj ≤ dr ,
    ι = |RDENC | + |RDKSA |.     dr = ι − σ                     
                                                                        →←
                                                       i=0
                                                                  τObj ≤ m .
              (2)                        (3)            (4)            (5)

Basic Rules for Attributes to Propagate and to Match. The attribute
propagation and the matching are governed by two types of constraints. The
ﬁrst type is due to the speciﬁcation of the targeted cipher; the second type
is due to the principle of the attack. If attacks are technically improved, the


                                          10
second type constraints should be adapted to the improvement. In turn, when
the second type constraints are properly relaxed, the attack space is expanded
so that improved attacks might be discovered.

Remark 1 (Bi-direction attribute-propagation and cancellation (BiDir)). Previ-
ously [4, 5, 10, 26, 30, 34], the constraints are imposed such that the propagation
of Red-attribute can “make a concession” 5 to the propagation of Blue, but Blue
never “gives in” to Red for forward computation, and vice versa. Unlike the pre-
vious work, in this work, the constraints are relaxed such that the propagation
of Blue or Red attribute can make a concession (cancel its impact by consum-
ing its degree of freedom) to the propagation of the opposite attribute in both
directions. The reasons are as follows.
 – In the modeling, we introduce neutral bytes into key states as well as in
   encryption states to bring more degree of freedom. In attribute propagation
   through encryption, letting Blue-propagation concede such that a local Red-
   cell be reserved, that might enable a remote Red-cell introduced from the
   key state be canceled such that Blue-propagation be possible in that remote
   point. That also applies to the case of Red-propagation.
 – Besides, letting Blue to concede and reserve a local Red-cell might enable
   this local Red-cell to propagate and combine with other Red-cells at a remote
   point such that their impacts on a certain cell be mutually canceled through
   MixColumns and beneﬁt Blue-propagation.
 – In addition, once an attribute of Blue or Red propagate to the ending states
   no matter from which direction, it provides source of degree of matching.
Relaxing the model in this way results in attacks with bi-direction attribute-
propagation; the attack space is expanded so that improved attacks are possible.
(See attack conﬁgurations in Figures 3, 5, 7, 13 for examples.) However, this
relaxation caused the models to be solved less eﬃciently. When the eﬃciency
is acceptable, we used such relaxed model for better attacks. Otherwise, we
restricted the models such that in certain rounds of the cipher, one attribute
can only propagate in one direction and concede in the other direction.
    In the following, we describe the MILP modeling with the relaxed model as
the basic setting. The diﬀerence between this basic modeling and the modeling
in [5] and how to get the restricted models will be indicated alongside.

Modeling of the Attribute Propagation through SubBytes and ShiftRows. The
SubBytes operation does not change the attribute of the cells, thus is not involved
5
    Here, the use of phrases “make a concession” or “give in” is due to a view of the for-
    ward computation and backward computation be in a competition for being able to
    be propagated unaﬀected. In previous attacks, for forward computation, propagation
    of Blue-attribute is of high priority. When unaﬀected propagation of Blue-attribute
    becomes not straightforward due to the existence of cells of Red-attribute, we may
    try to cancel the impact by consuming the freedom of backward to ensure the propa-
    gation of Blue-attribute. We say such cancellation of impact by consuming freedom
    “concede”, “make a concession ” or “give in”.


                                            11
when building the basic model. The ShiftRows operation permutes the state cells,
thus can be modeled by a set of equations or hardcoded variable substitution.

Modeling of the Attribute Propagation through AddRoundKey and XOR (XOR-RULE).
The AddRoundKey operation is involved in the model when the cipher has KeySched-
ule (message schedule), and the attack exploits freedom from the key state. Ba-
sically, the attribute propagation through AddRoundKey is governed by a set of
cell-wise constraints under the name XOR-RULE. The high-level principle is that
White is the dominant attribute, Gray is the recessive attribute, Blue and Red
are mutually exclusive attributes. The concrete rules are as follows.

 – A White cell XORed with a cell of any attribute results in a White cell, i.e.,
   ( ⊕ )−  → ;
 – a Gray cell XORed with a cell of any attribute results in the cell of the same
   attribute, i.e.,
   ( ⊕ )−  → ;
 – a couple of Blue and Red cells results in a cell deteriorated to White, i.e.,
   ( ⊕ )−  → ;
 – a couple of Blue cells can keep the attributes without consuming or evolve
   to Gray by consuming a degree of freedom of Blue, i.e.,
                             −1×
   ( ⊕ )−  → or ( ⊕ ) −−−−→ ;
 – a couple of Red cells can keep the attributes without consuming or evolve to
   Gray by consuming a degree of freedom of Red, i.e.,
                             −1×
   ( ⊕ )−
        →        or ( ⊕ ) −−−−→ .

These propagation rules can be described using only a few variables, thus can
be easily translated into inequalities using convex hull computations [31].

Modeling of the Attribute Propagation through MixColumns (MC-RULE). The at-
tribute propagation through MixColumns is governed by a set of column-wise
constraints under the name MC-RULE. The MC-RULE constraints are mostly gov-
erned by the branch number (Brn ) of the MixColumns. Again, the high-level
principle is that White is the dominant attribute, Gray is the recessive attribute,
Blue and Red are mutually exclusive attributes. The concrete rules are as follows:

 – any White cell in an input column results in all cells in the output column
   deteriorated to White, i.e.,
   (i × , j × ) −   → (Nrow × ), where i ≥ 1, i + j = Nrow ;
 – the Gray attribute inherits to the output without consuming degrees of free-
   dom only if all cells in the input column are Gray, i.e.,
   (Nrow × ) −  → (Nrow × );
 – existing no White cell, a column of i Blue, j Red, and k Gray cells propagate
   to a column of i′ Blue, j ′ Red, k ′ Gray, and ℓ′ White cells by consuming
   j ′ + k ′ degree of freedom from Blue, and i′ + k ′ from Red, i.e.,
                          −(j ′ +k′ )×   if i̸=0
   (i × , j × , k × ) −−−−−−−−−−−−→ (i′ × , j ′ × , k ′ × , ℓ′ × ), where
                          −(i′ +k′ )×    if j̸=0


                                            12
                                                      {
                    ′    ′     ′     ′             j ′ + k ′ < i ≤ Nrow if i ̸= 0
     i + j + k = i + j + k + ℓ = Nrow and                                         ,
                                                   j ′ + k ′ = Nrow     otherwise
     {
       i′ + k ′ < j ≤ Nrow if j ̸= 0
                                        . Note that when i ̸= 0 , j ′ + k ′ < i ⇔
       i′ + k ′ = Nrow      otherwise
     Nrow − i′ − l′ < i ⇔ i + i′ + l′ >= Nrow + 1, which is due to the branch
     number; similarly, i′ + k ′ < j when j ̸= 0 is due to the branch number.

To formalize these propagation rules into a system of inequalities, the involved
number of variables is not small. Concretely, the involved variables include the
binary variables that indicate the attribute of each cell in the input and output
                               i , yi ), and ωi for i ∈ {0, 1, · · · , Nrow − 1}, the general
columns, i.e., (xIi , yiI ), (xO    O         I

variables c⃗x and cy⃗ representing the consumed degree of freedom from Blue and
Red, respectively. Apart from those variables, three auxiliary binary variables
are introduced to indicate the following attributes of the input column:
     {                                {                                {
       1   exists White cell,            1   all are Blue/Gray,      1   all are Red/Gray,
ω=
⃗                             ⃗x =                              ⃗
                                                                y=
       0   otherwise.                    0   exists Red/White.       0   exists Blue/White.
             (6)                                 (7)                         (8)

The constraints can then be formalized using inequalities listed in Eq. (15, 16, 17).

Remark 2. The set of inequalities will be simpler when one restricts the mod-
els such that one attribute can only propagate in one direction and concede
in the other direction. For example, for the propagation of the Blue attribute
to the forward, it only consumes degrees
                                     ∑Nrowof freedom from Red. Thus, the last
                                           −1 O
two inequalities in Eq. (16) can be ( i=0     yi ) − Niosum · ⃗y = 0; In Eq. (17),
inequalities on c⃗x can be removed.

Modeling of the Matching through MixColumns and AddRoundKey (MATCH-RULE).
The modeling for matching also focuses on the MixColumns and AddRoundKey
operations. The matching through MixColumns and AddRoundKey is governed
by a set of column-wise constraints under the name MATCH-RULE.
    The involved states are those around MixColumns at the matching round,
          −−→       ←−−                     −−→         ←−−
including End and End in encryption and EndKMC or EndK in key-schedule.
            −−→      ←−−
Note that End and End are states that have not been added with key-state
−−→KMC       ←−−K
End       or End . Since AddRoundKey is linear, the inﬂuence of AddRoundKey
for matching can be formalized using simple rules. Concretely, only a White cell
in key state destroy the match-ability of the corresponding cell in encryption
state. The Blue and Red cells in key state do not impact the match-ability but
on the contrary might provide degree of matching.

Remark 3. For speciﬁc targeted cipher whose key-schedule is almost identical to
                                             −−→ −−→
the encryption, e.g., Whirlpool, one can use End ⊕ EndKMC as an equivalent key
            ←−− ←−−K
addition to End ⊕ End . The color pattern (most importantly, the distribution
                   −−→            ←−−
of White cells) of EndKMC and EndK are diﬀerent in most cases. Thus, adding


                                                13
−−→KMC       ←−−
End       or EndK , these two ways may have diﬀerent eﬀects on the degree of
matching. To ﬁnd the optimal solution, one should consider both ways. However,
we can simply choose to use the key state with fewer White cells. That is because,
known the propagation direction of the key-schedule (i.e., initK   r ), between the
           −−→KMC         ←−−K
two states End       and End , the one that is near to the initial key state must
have set of White cells be subset of that in the remote state, thus has less impact.
                                                   →←
    The condition for the i-th column to have m i degree of matching is as
follows: denote the number of known cells (i.e., except White cells) in the input
                                                    →←
and output columns by mki ; when mki > Nrow , m i = mki − Nrow ; otherwise,
→←
 m i = 0. Denote the number of white cells by mwi ; Since mki = 2·Nrow −mwi , one
      →←
have m i = max(0, Nrow − mwi ). Accordingly, the concrete system of inequalities
modeling MATCH-RULE can be obtained as explained in Sect. A and as listed
in Eq. (18).


3.2   Superposition States and Separate Attribute-Propagation

Except for allowing bi-direction attribute-propagation, the above basic modeling
is in line with previous work [4, 5, 10, 26, 30, 34], where Blue and Red attributes
propagate exclusively and competitively through each operation. Once the two
exclusive attribute propagate into the same cell position, this cell is considered
being White, cannot be independently computed in either forward nor backward.
    However, such modeling might miss valid attacks as will be discussed shortly.
In our ﬁnal modeling, the two exclusive attributes Blue and Red propagate inde-
pendently as long as it is possible. This is achieved by introducing superposition
states. Superposition states are all intermediate states in encryption and key-
schedule being separated into two virtual states. One virtual state carries one
attribute propagation independently of the other attribute propagation. The
two virtual states are combined only when going through non-linear operations.
In this way, two exclusive attributes can simultaneously propagate through all
linear operations in both encryption and key-schedule. See Fig. 3 and 22 for
examples, and see Fig. 3 and Fig. 10 for the correspondence between superposi-
tion states and real states. This superposition setting captures the independence
of the computation in a more essential way, allows new ways of local collisions
between/within the encryption and key states, thus, maximize the chances of can-
celing impacts on independence and enables new ways of MITM decomposition.
Concretely, the reasons and beneﬁts of separating propagation with superposi-
tion states are as follows.

 – As mentioned above, under certain constraints, Blue propagation can make
   a concession so that impacts are canceled and Red can propagate unaﬀected,
   and vice versa. To cancel impact, it requires consuming degrees of freedom.
   To be able to consume degrees of freedom, diﬀerent types of operations im-
   pose diﬀerent requirements on the attribute of input states. Concretely, the
   XOR-RULE and MC-RULE requires diﬀerently for canceling impacts. Attributes


                                        14
   of state cells might not meet the individual requirements but it is actually
   possible to cancel impacts when combining these two linear operations.
   In [5], the propagation through the combination of AddRoundKey and Mix-
   Columns is characterized using the set of XOR-MC-RULE. In XOR-MC-RULE, the
   OR of the attribute indicating variables of encryption and key-state cell is
   used to indicate the attribute of the input cell of MixColumns. In that way,
   the group of cells of the same attribute in both encryption and key states
   can jointly cancel their impacts on certain output cells.
   However, using only XOR-MC-RULE, the possibility of the following scenario is
   missed. That is, an attribute can be completely canceled via XOR-RULE before
   propagating through MixColumns (refer to Fig. 2a for an illustration). Thus,
   to ﬁnd optimal attack conﬁgurations, applying XOR-RULE-then-MC-RULE and
   XOR-MC-RULE should be both considered in the models.
   In this work, we model the combination of AddRoundKey and MixColumns
   by considering the separation of (Blue and Red) attribute propagation with
   superposition states. Note that AddRoundKey and MixColumns are linear.
   Essentially, for linear operations, in the same state, the attributes of Blue
   and Red can separately propagate through them and then combine by cell-
   wise XOR upon the non-linear operation (i.e., SubBytes).
   Due to this separation with superposition states, XOR-RULE and MC-RULE
   without XOR-MC-RULE are suﬃcient (refer to Fig. 2 for an illustration of the
   separation of attribute-propagation through AddRoundKey and MixColumns).
 – Additionally, the key/message-schedule of the ciphers also has linear oper-
   ations. It is possible that before going through the non-linear operation in
   the key-schedule, the attribute of one cell in the round-key is a linear com-
   bination of Blue and Red. If not be separately considered, such a linear
   combination of Blue and Red becomes White. Separately, the Blue compo-
   nent in the linear combination in a key state can be used to cancel impact
   from the Blue component in another key state or in an encryption state, and
   same for the Red component. Consequently, impacts that cannot be canceled
   in previous models can be canceled now, thus independent propagation gets
   more chances (see Fig. 22 for an example.)
 – Moreover, at the matching point, if a key state cell is in superposition (a
   linear combination of Blue and Red), it does not impact the matching ability
   of the corresponding state cell, and instead, the Blue component and Red
   component may provide degrees of matching (see Fig. 18 for an example.)


3.3   Multiple Ways of AddRoundKey (MulAK)
In Whirlpool, the key-schedule shares the same operations with the encryption
except for AddRoundKey. This identity between encryption and key-schedule
enables that in encryption, the AddRoundKey can be easily moved around Mix-
Columns. Moving around MixColumns is simply switching between adding #KMC
or adding k, where #KMC and k are the states before and after MixColumns in
the round function of key-schedule, that is, a switch between adding the real
round-key k or an equivalent (up to MixColumns) round-key #KMC.


                                      15
                                             MC




                                                                                 MC        MC
                     MC              MC      MC            XOR-MC
  XOR-MC
                                                                               −1
              −1                                            −1

  XOR-MC       XOR-then-MC     XOR-then-MC   MC-then-XOR   XOR-MC             Blue       Red


(a) XOR-MC-RULE does not     (b) XOR-MC-RULE is necessary if not in   (c) XOR-RULE and MC-RULE are suf-
cover a propagation          superposition                            ﬁcient once in superposition
  – In 2a, using XOR-MC-RULE, a result of full Red attribute can not be achieved, which can be
    obtained by XOR-then-MC-RULE.
  – In 2b, without superposition, (Blue and Red) attribute-propagation ruled by XOR-MC-RULE
    cannot be obtained directly by XOR-then-MC-RULE and MC-then-XOR-RULE.
  – In 2c, with (Blue and Red) attribute-propagation in superposition, XOR-RULE and MC-RULE are
    suﬃcient (2c achieve the same results as achieved by XOR-MC-RULE 2b).

  Fig. 2: Combination of linear operations and superposition attribute-propagation



    Moving AddRoundKey before MixColumns and using #KMC can bring more
advantages in some cases. Take the case where we need to reserve Blue by
consuming Red for example. Let’s focus on one column of the state. Suppose
there is one Red cell in that column of #MC and one Red cell in the same cell-
position in #KMC; the inﬂuence of these single Red cells will be diﬀused into
the whole columns in both states if there is no constraint. In such case, adding
#KMC with #MC and letting the Red cell in #MC be canceled by the Red cell in
#KMC achieve the same cancellation eﬀect but consume fewer degrees of freedom
than adding #AK with k (take using #MC5 ⊕ #KMC4 vs. #AK5 ⊕ k5 in Fig. 3
for an example). Similarly, it is also possible that adding #AK with k after the
MixColumns has more advantages than adding #MC with #KMC (take using
#SB ⊕ k3 vs. #MC ⊕ k2 in Fig. 3 for an example).
     4               5

    Thus, to ﬁnd optimal attack conﬁgurations, both scenarios should be consid-
ered. The essential diﬀerence between the scenarios is to either ﬁrstly use freedom
in the key state to directly cancel impacts before diﬀusion or to postpone the
insertion of the key state in order to postpone impacts from the key. We name
the choice of applying the ﬁrst scenario by AK-MC-RULE and the second scenario
by MC-AK-RULE. The integration of the two scenarios into one model is in the
form of indicator constraints that is available in Gurobi. Note that, for forward
computation, AK-MC-RULE corresponds to using #MC ⊕ #KMC, MC-AK-RULE cor-
responds to using #AC ⊕ k; for backward computation, AK-MC-RULE corresponds
to using #SB ⊕ k, and MC-AK-RULE corresponds to using #MC ⊕ #KMC;
    In addition, since the MixColumns is column-wise, diﬀerent columns can apply
diﬀerent ways (apply AK-MC-RULE or MC-AK-RULE) independently. Besides, since
MixColumns is linear, with superposition states, diﬀerent attributes of Blue and
Red can independently apply AK-MC-RULE or MC-AK-RULE.
    Integrating such ﬂexibility of choice into the MILP models expand the covered
attack space but make the solving less eﬃcient. So, to decide in which way to
proceed for each column, we use the heuristic that when the key-schedule has
already consumed some degree of freedom in that column, we apply MC-AK-RULE;
otherwise, apply AK-MC-RULE.


                                                   16
3.4     Enhanced Model with Guess-and-Determine (GnD)
The Guess-and-Determine Strategy. In MITM attacks, one unfavorable situation
is that a single or a few unknown cells in the input column of MC makes all cells
in the output column unknown (refer to point 1 of MC-RULE). This is inevitable
due to the diﬀusion of MixColumns, especially the property of the MDS matrix.
     To turn things around in such situations, Sasaki et al. in [30] invent the
following guess-and-determine strategy. That is, guess values of the few unknown
cells to continue the propagation of attribute to reach the matching point, after
(partial) matching, check the consistency of the few guessed cells. If the gained
degree of matching is suﬃcient and the required guesswork is very little, one can
still achieve a better attack complexity than a brute-force attack.
     Concretely, denote 2c by ς (where c is the number of bits in each cell). Let:
     −→
  – dgb be the number of cells only guessed to be Blue (forward computation);
     ←−
  – dgr be the number of cells only guessed to be Red (backward computation);
     ←→
  – dgbr be the number of cells guessed to be both Blue and Red. 6
      The framework of the MITM attack with GnD is as follows:
 1. Assign arbitrary compatible values to all cells except for those depending on
    the neutral bits, and assign arbitrary values to the constants in pre-deﬁned
    constraints on neutral bits;
 2. Compute values {−    →v i } of forward neutral bits and values {←   −
                                                                        v i } of backward
    neutral bits fulﬁlling pre-deﬁned constraints.
               →
               −                                                −→ ←−→
 3. For all ς db values {−→
                          v i } of forward neutral bits, and ς (dgb +dgbr ) guessed values
    {−→v g } for forward, compute forward to the matching point and store all
      → −→ ←−→
      −                                                                     −
                                                                            →
    ς db +dgb +dgbr
                    partial matching values {− →
                                               v m } in a look up table T (the values
    are − →
          v and −
            i
                    →
                    v , and the index is −
                     g
                                           →
                                           v ).
                                             m
                ←
                −                                                  ←− ←−→
 4. For all ς values {←
                dr          −
                            v i } of backward neutral bits, and ς (dgr +dgbr ) guessed
    values {←−
             v g } for backward, compute backward to the matching point, obtain
    the partial matching values ←    −
                                     v m.
                                              −
                                              → −
 5. For all values of v i and v g in entry T [←
                        −
                        →         −
                                  →              v m ], use −
                                                            →
                                                            v i and ← −
                                                                      v i to compute
                                        −
                                        →      ←−
    and check if the guessed values v g and v g are compatible. For compatible
    guesses, compute to the matching point to check if it is a full-state match. If
    so, use −
            →
            v i and ← −
                      v i to compute the preimage, output it, and return; otherwise,
    repeat from Step 1 by changing values assigned at that step.
In the above framework of the MITM attack with GnD,
                                                         −
                                                         → −→ ←→
 – the total degree of freedom for Blue with guessing is db + dgb + dgbr ;
                                                        ←
                                                        − ←− ←→
 – the total degree of freedom for Red with guessing is dr + dgr + dgbr ;
                                                             − ←− ←−→
                                                    → −→ ←−→ ←
                                                    −                           →←
 – the expected number of matched pairs is ς db +dgb +dgbr +dr +dgr +dgbr − m ;
6
    Since we allow bi-direction attribute propagation in superposition states, it might
    bring beneﬁt to guess a superposition cell to be simultaneously Blue and Red. Thus,
    here is a slight generalization of the previous GnD strategy.


                                           17
 – the required number of repetitions to get a full match at the guessing cells
                                           → −→ ←−→ ←
                                           −        − ←− ←−→              →←       −→ ←−→ ←−
    and →←a full-state match is ς −(db +dgb +dgbr +dr +dgr +dgbr − m ) · ς dgb +dgbr +dgr ·
                                 → ←
                                 −   − ←−→
    ς (n− m )
              , which equals ς n−db −dr −dgbr ;
                                                  → ←
                                                  − − ←−→         → −→ ←−→
                                                                  −                   ←
                                                                                      − ←− ←−→
Thus, the complexity of the attack is ς n−db −dr −dgbr ·(ς db +dgb +dgbr +ς dr +dgr +dgbr +
 → −→ ←−→ ←
 −        − ←− ←−→              →←
ς db +dgb +dgbr +dr +dgr +dgbr − m ), which equals
                             ←
                             − −→             → ←−
                                              −              →←    −→ ←− ←−→
                  ς n · (ς −(dr −dgb ) + ς −(db −dgr ) + ς −( m −dgb −dgr −dgbr ) )
                                    ←
                                    − −→       → ←−
                                               −             →←    −→ ←− ←−→                   (9)
               ≃ ς n · max(ς −(dr −dgb ) , ς −(db −dgr ) , ς −( m −dgb −dgr −dgbr ) )

    Accordingly, the complexity is determined by
                        ←
                        − −→ −     → ←− →← −→ ←− ←→
                    min(dr − dgb , db − dgr , m −dgb − dgr − dgbr ).

Building Model for Guessing. To model the mechanism of GnD, three binary
variables, gb , gr , gbr , are introduced for each cell in the input state of MixColumns
(invMixColumns for the backward computation).
     The variables indicate whether the values of the cells should be guessed to
be of one attribute. Concretely, gb = 1 for guessing one White cell to be Blue.
gr = 1 for guessing one White cell to be Red. gbr = 1 for guessing one White cell
to be Blue (for forward propagation) and also Red (for backward propagation).
     With these guess-indicating variables, attribute-indicating variables of each
cell in the input of MixColumns are thus constrained together with attribute-
indicating variables of the cell in output state of last operations (e.g., ShiftRows
or AddRoundKey). Besides, according to the complexity Eq. (9) of the attack
                                                       −
                                                       → ←  − →←            −
                                                                            → ←− ←   −
with GnD, the objective should turn from min( db , dr , m ) to min( db − dgr , dr −
−→ →← −→ ←− ←→
dgb , m −dgb − dgr − dgbr ). Thus, the variable that to be maximized is constrained
as in Eq. (10) and (11).
     
     −→         ∑
            totalr −1,n−1
     
                         gb ri ,
     
     
      dgb =
     
                                                       −
                                                         → ←−
     
     
               r=0,i=0
                                                 
     ←− totalr∑   −1,n−1                        τObj ≤ db − dgr ,
                              r                             ←
                                                            − −→
       dgr =                 gr i ,    (10)          τObj ≤ dr − dgb ,                  (11)
     
                                                
                                                 τ        →←    −→ ←− ←→
     
              r=0,i=0
                                                      Obj ≤ m −dgb − dgr − dgbr .
     
                 ∑
             totalr −1,n−1
     
     ←→
     
     dgbr =               gbr ri ,
                   r=0,i=0


   Note that in the starting round, all cells are known and in the matching round,
guessing brought no advantage. Thus, for these two rounds, such constraints on
guessing can be omitted. Besides, generally, guessing are only required around
the matching point. Thus, when trade-oﬀ between search quality and search
eﬃciency is needed, these guessing constraints can be added only for rounds
around the matching point.


                                                18
3.5       Transforming to Models for Searching for Collision Attacks

A MITM partial target preimage attack whose matching point is at the last round
can be transformed into a collision attack, as described by Li et al. in [23]. Thus,
the searching of MITM preimage attacks can be constraint to search for such
partial target preimage attacks, and then translate into valid collision attack.
Concretely, one have the follows.

Deﬁnition 1 ((t-bit) partial target pseudo preimage attack on CF [23]).
Given the value v of t bits in T , ﬁnd (h′ , m′ ) such that t bits in T ′ := CF(h′ , m′ )
at the same position as the t bits in T , take value v.

Let A be a random algorithm that can ﬁnd a t-bit partial target pseudo preimage
with a complexity of 2s . This complexity can be in the average sense, which
means that A can generate 2r diﬀerent (h′ , m′ , T ′ ) in one time with a complexity
2r+s . Additionally, assume A output diﬀerent (h′ , m′ , T ′ )’s for diﬀerent calls.
Then, a free-start collision attack goes as follows.

    – Set t-bit arbitrary value d′ to the target. Call A with d′ as the partial target
      and run it to obtain 2(n−t)/2 values of (h′ , m′ , T ′ ).
    – From the 2(n−t)/2 values of (h′ , m′ , T ′ ), ﬁnd a collision on the remaining
      (n − t) bits of T ′ .

According to the birthday paradox, with a high probability, the above procedure
produces a valid collision pair. The total complexity of this attack is 2s+(n−t)/2 .
     The above complexity analysis misses the details of the MITM complex-
ity. In the following, we re-formalize the complexity analysis of the above col-
lision attack using its correspondence with the MITM-GnD preimage attack.
Essentially, the A can be the core of a MITM pseudo preimage attack on CF.
                                             →←
The t-bit partial target corresponds to c× m bits for partial matching in the
MITM attack. Essentially, the t bits for partial matching can be a ﬁxed t-bit
linear relations on ℓ bits for ℓ ≥ t, which restrict the values of ℓ bits to a
subspace of dimension ℓ − t. Thus, matching through MixColumns instead of
matching at exact same bit positions does not have essential inﬂuence on the
eﬀectiveness
      {       of the attack. The 2s computational complexity of
         → −→ ←−→ ←
         −                − ←− ←−→ −       → −→ ←−→ ←          } A corresponds to
                                                          − ←− ←−→ →←              → ←
                                                                                   − − ←−→      →←
    max (db +dgb +dgbr ),(dr +dgr +dgbr ),(db +dgb +dgbr +dr +dgr +dgbr − m )
ς                  { −→ ←                                                        /ς db +dr +dgbr − m , which
                          − ←− −     → −→ ←− ←−→ →← }                 →←
                max (dgb −dr ),(dgr −db ),(dgb +dgr +dgbr − m )
equals to ς                                                  /ς − m . Thus, the total com-
                    { −→ ←
                         −   ←− − → −→ ←− ←−→ →← }               →←       →←
             max (dgb −dr ),(dgr −db ),(dgb +dgr +dgbr − m )            n− m
plexity is ς                                                 /ς − m × ς 2 , i.e.,
                            {←− −→ −     → ←− →← −→ ←− ←−→ }                      →←
                       − min (dr −dgb ),(db −dgr ),( m −dgb −dgr −dgbr )        n+ m
                                                                                                (12)
                   ς                                                       ×ς     2    .

For a valid attack (better than birthday attack), the following should be fulﬁlled

     {−
      → ←− →←                      ←
                                   − −→ →←                  −→ ←− ←→ →← }
      db − dgr > m /2,             dr − dgb > m /2,         dgb + dgr + dgbr < m /2 . (13)


                                                   19
For searching for the best attack, the objective function is the same as that for
preimage attack, i.e.,
                {      {−
                        → ←− ←    − −→ →← −→ ←− ←→}}
            max min db − dgr , dr − dgb , m −dgb − dgr − dgbr       .       (14)

Remark 4. A solution to the MILP model only corresponds to a valid attack
conﬁguration but does not formally imply a valid attack. For the attack com-
plexity in Eq. 1, 9, and 12 to be valid, the attacker should be able to generate
each value of neutral bytes with (amortized) computational complexity O(1). In
some obtained attack conﬁgurations, the neutral bytes are constrained in such a
sophisticated manner that it is not trivial to eﬃciently generate their values. For
such non-trivial cases, we propose to use local meet-in-the-middle procedures to
solve the problem (as done for the pseudo-preimage attack on 7-round Whirlpool
in Sect. 4.1, the pseudo-preimage attack on 6-round Grøstl-256 in Sect. C.2, and
the free-start collision attack on 7-round AES-128 in Fig. 22). Such local meet-in-
the-middle procedures might be found by manual analysis or aided by automatic
tools, such as the Automatic-tool from [8]. Sometimes, to achieve amortized com-
putational complexity O(1), it is necessary to pre-compute values of neutral bytes
for many ﬁxed bytes (enumerated in the outermost loop of the attack) at once.
However, for some very complex cases (marked with ‘?’ in Table 1), even aided
by automatic-tools and considering amortized complexity, it might be diﬃcult
to ﬁnd pre-computation procedures with total complexity lower than the main
procedure. As a theoretical problem for all attacks under this framework, this
problem of eﬃciently generating values of neutral bits stays open.


3.6   Exploit Symmetry of the Ciphers

Integrating that many technical generalizations, the search space is greatly en-
larged but the search is slow down. One needs to make a trade-oﬀ between the
quality of the searching result and the eﬃciency of the search. Apart from the
ways of trade-oﬀ mentioned alongside the introduction of the modeling, one can
reduce the problem scale using symmetry of the ciphers. Speciﬁcally, in many
AES-like designs, the states and operations have symmetric structures and pa-
rameters. The symmetry allows projecting attacks on small-size versions to that
on large-size versions. Concretely, a state of 8 × 8 cells can be viewed as a 2 × 2
matrix of state of 4 × 4 cells, or a 1 × 2 matrix of state of 8 × 4 cells. Suppose
the ShiftRows parameters of the 8 × 8 state version are {p0 , p1 , . . . , p7 } and (pi+4
mod 4) = pi for i ∈ {0, . . . , 3}, and 2 times the branch number of MixColumns
of a 4 × 4 state version is no less than that of the 8 × 8 state version. Then,
obtaining an attack on the 4 × 4 state version, cloning the state patterns four
times and placing them in a 2 × 2 matrix, this will result in an attack on the
8 × 8 state version. The projection from the attack conﬁguration in Fig. 10 to
the attack conﬁguration in Fig. 11 is one example of such correspondence. Ex-
ploiting such symmetry of the ciphers, the search can be eﬃcient, while might
lose asymmetric attack conﬁgurations (e.g., that in Fig. 12).


                                           20
4     Application to Preimage Attacks on Whirlpool
Whirlpool [6] is a block-cipher based secure hash function designed by Rijmen
and Barreto in 2000 and has been adopted as an ISO/IEC standard. It produces
a 512-bit hash value using Miyaguchi-Preneel-mode (MP-mode) CF. The CF is
deﬁned as CF(Hi , Mi ) = EHi (Mi ) ⊕ Mi ⊕ Hi , where E is a 10-round AES-like
block cipher with 8 × 8-byte internal states. This underlying block cipher takes
the 512-bit chaining value Hi as the key material and the 512-bit message block
Mi as the input of the encryption. Both the encryption and key-schedule use
round functions consisting of four operations:
 – SubBytes (SB) applies the Substitution-Box to each byte.
 – ShiftColumns (SC) cyclically shifts the j-column downwards by j bytes.
 – MixRows (MR) multiplies each row of the state by an MDS matrix.
 – AddRoundKey (AK or AddRoundConstants AC) XOR the round key (or round
   constants in key-schedule) to the state.
Note that the last round is a complete round which is unlike AES; a whiting key
is added before the ﬁrst round of encryption. However, the eﬀect of whitening
key will be canceled in the splice-and-cut MITM attacks due to the feed-forward
mechanism of MP-mode. Please refer to [6] for a detailed description of Whirlpool.

4.1   New Attacks Resulted from Applying the MILP Modeling
Applying the MILP modeling in Sect. 3 on Whirlpool, improved attacks are found
for 5- and 6-round, and ﬁrst attacks are found for 7-round.
    For 5-round attacks, guess-and-determine is not required, but allowing bi-
direction attribute-propagation/cancellation is essential to achieve the best com-
plexity. For 6-round attacks, guess-and-determine is the critical technique that
enables the improved results. For 7-round attacks, guess-and-determine and
multiple ways of AddRoundKey (ﬂexible choices from applying AK-MC-RULE or
MC-AK-RULE) are the two critical points.
    The remaining of this section describes how to use one of the resulted at-
tack conﬁgurations to launch a concrete attack on 7-round Whirlpool. A brief
description of the improved 6-round attack is then followed. In the description,
ShiftRows and MixColumns instead of ShiftColumns and MixRows are used. Thus,
the states should be transposed to correspond with the speciﬁcation of Whirlpool.
This transposition does not inﬂuence the attacks.
    Please refer to Figures 11, 12, and 13 for visualizations of conﬁgurations of
the 7-, 6-, and 5-round attacks, and refer to Sect. B for a summary of notations.

The attack on 7-round Whirlpool can be obtained by searching on a small
version with Nrow × Ncol = 4 × 4 states and then projecting to attack on the
8 × 8-state version. In the sequel, to facilitate readers to ﬁnd the correspondence
between the text description and the code implementation for experimental veriﬁ-
cation of the attack, we describe it using the small version with Nrow ×Ncol = 4×4


                                        21
states that is depicted in Fig. 3. One can quickly project this attack on the small
version to the real version of Whirlpool (refer to Sect. 3.6 and the correspondence
between Figures 10 and 11 for illustrations). The attack complexity on the real
version is the fourth power of that on the small version.
    The attack conﬁguration in Fig. 3a is found with the MILP models. With
this conﬁguration, one can conceive an equivalent conﬁguration shown in Fig. 3b.
Following both conﬁgurations, one can devise the attack, with diﬀerent proce-
dures to compute initial values of backward neutral bytes. The latter (Fig. 3b)
is more direct for the computation; thus, it will be used in the following descrip-
tion. In the following description, all referred states are actual states that are
the combination of two virtual states.


Compute initial values of neutral bytes in Red. To get the initial values of back-
ward neutral bytes (in Red), one only needs to enumerate all possible values of
cell k3 [15], and ﬁx values of cells in the main anti-diagonal of #SB4 . That is
due to the following observation. Fixing the values of cells in the ﬁrst column of
      4
#MC to be 0 (equivalently, ﬁxing the values of cells in the main anti-diagonal of
     4            −1
#SB to be Sbox       [0]), the values of the ﬁrst column of #SB5 equals that of k4 .
Note that the operations of the round function in encryption and key-schedule
are exactly the same, excepting the former using AddRoundKey and the latter us-
ing AddRoundConstants. Thus, the ﬁrst anti-diagonal of #MC5 will equal that of
        4                                                                 th
#KMC . Consequently, the impact brought by adding Red cells in the 4         round
                                                             4
(k4 ) will be canceled in the next round by adding #KMC without consuming
degrees of freedom.


Compute initial values of neutral bytes in Blue. To get the initial values of
forward neutral bytes (in Blue), one focuses on the constraints among states
{#MC2 , #AK2 , #SB3 , #MC3 , #AK3 } (refer to Fig. 3b).
    There are ﬁve degrees of freedom (in bytes) for the forward (Blue). Using
four out of the ﬁve, one can keep the same attack complexity because the degree
of freedom for backward is the bottleneck. Thus, we ﬁx the value of one Blue
cell in #AK3 , i.e., #AK3 [3], as indicated by C .
    Note that values of Blue cells are constrained such that they have no impact
on the last anti-diagonal of #MC2 and the ﬁrst diagonal of #AK3 (are mapped
to constants on these state cells). Denote the constants by #MCC2 [3, 6, 9, 12] and
      3
#AKC [0, 5, 10]. The initial values of forward neutral bytes can be computed using
a local meet-in-the-middle procedure as shown in Algorithm 1. In Algorithm 1,
the procedure starts from guessing two free cells in the ﬁrst column of #AK3
and one cell in each of the columns in #SB3 , computes other undetermined cells
column-by-column using predetermined constant-impacts on cells in #MC2 , and
compute back pair-wisely to match at constant cells in #AK3 . From Algorithm 1,
the computational complexity for obtaining the initial values of neutral bytes in
Blue is 232 and the memory required is 232 (blocks).


                                        22
The Main Procedure (refer to Fig. 3b). Assign arbitrary values to those constant
impacts of Blue on Red in #MC2 (i.e., #MC2C [3, 6, 9, 12]) and to #AK3C [3]. Set
     3                                                                         −1
#AK [0, 5, 10, 12, 13, 14] be 0, k3 [0, 5, 10] and #SB4 [0, 5, 10, 15] be Sbox    [0].
    Compute the initial values of backward neutral bytes as described above and
                                                  −−→
as shown in Algorithm 1, store the result in TInit .

 1. For a new value of 12 Gray bytes k3 [1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14], calculate
    the values of Gray bytes in k4 and #KMC4 (this is expected to repeat ς 11
    times before terminating from Step 1(b)iiiE according to Sect. 3.4).
                                                                   −−→
    (a) For each value −→
                        v of Blue cells in #MC3 stored in T
                            i                                        Init ,
          i. start from #MC3 , compute forward (only cells in Blue) with the
             values of Gray bytes in k3 and k4 to #MC5 ;
         ii. XOR #MC5 with the values of Gray bytes in #KMC4 ;
        iii. set the ﬁrst anti-diagonal of #MC5 to be zero, and compute forward
             to #MC6 (without AddRoundKey with k5 but need to XOR the round
             constant RC[5], because #KMC4 is used instead);
        iv. compute MC(#MC6 ) and get the value −        →v m of the main diagonal
                   −
                   →                         −
                                             →         −
                                                       →
         v. store v i in a look-up table T with v m as index;
    (b) For each value ←  −
                          v i of the Red cell in k3 , with the value of Gray cells,
          i. compute all values of the round keys, i.e., k2 , k1 , k0 , km , k4 , k5 , k6 ,
             where km is the master key;
         ii. set the Red cell #AK3 [15] to be ←   −
                                                  v i ⊕ Sbox−1 [0], combine with the
             constant value in #AK , compute backward up to #AK0 ;
                                       3

        iii. For each value ←  −
                               v g of the Pink cells in #AK0 ,
             A. with the value of Red cell in the ﬁrst column of #AK0 , compute
                 backward through feed-forward, XOR the given target T , compute
                       6
                 #AK ;
              B. get the value ←  −
                                  v m of the main diagonal of #AK6 .
                                                                          −
                                                                          → −
              C. for each value − →v i of Blue cells in #MC3 stored in T [←   v m ], com-
                 bine the values of Red cells, restart the computation from #AK3
                 up to #AK0 ;
             D. If the newly computed value −     →v ′g of the Pink cells in #AK0 does
                             ←−
                 not equal v g , go to Step 1(b)iii. Else, compute to #AK6 , denote
                 the value by ←  −
                                 v.
              E. Start from #AK3 with the combined knowledge of values of both
                 Blue and Red cells, compute to MC(#MC6 ), if its value −      →v equals
                 ←−                                                           0
                  v , a full-state match is found, output the state #SB and the
                 key state km , and terminate. Otherwise, go to Step 1.

Complexity. As analyzed above, the computational and memory complexity of
the precomputation of the initial value of forward neutral bytes is 232 . As for the
complexity of the main procedure, the attack conﬁguration on the small version
                                    −
                                    →        ←
                                             −      ←−       →←
(n = Nrow × Ncol = 4 × 4 = 16) is, db = 4, dr = 1, dgr = 3, m = 4, ς = 28 , and
−→ ←→
dgb = dgbr = 0. According to Eq. (9), the complexity of the whole attack on the


                                            23
                                       ←
                                       − −→           → ←−
                                                      −              →←   −→ ←− ←−→
small version is therefore ς n · (ς −(dr −dgb ) + ς −(db −dgr ) + ς −( m −dgb −dgr −dgbr ) ) =
ς 16 · max(ς −1 + ς −(4−3) + ς −(4−3) ) = ς 15 = 2120
     Projecting to the real version of Whirlpool (n = Nrow × Ncol = 16 · 4 = 64),
the complexity will be (2120 )4 = 2480 . Concretely, the attack conﬁguration will
     −
     →                 ←−                 ←−                     →←
be db = 4 · 4 = 16, dr = 1 · 4 = 4, dgr = 3 · 4 = 12, m = 4 · 4 = 16, ς = 28 ,
       −→    ←→
and dgb = dgbr = 0. Accordingly, the attack complexity on the real version of
7-round Whirlpool is ς 64 · max(ς −4 + ς −(16−12) + ς −(16−12) ) = 2480 .
                                                                                            −
                                                                                            →
     The memory required by the main procedure is the memory taken by T ,
whose size is limited by the degree of freedom for forward, that is 232 for the
small version and 2128 for the real version.
     To further verify the attack and its complexity analysis, we implemented
the attack on the small version with 4 × 4 states. The round functions of en-
cryption and key-schedule of small Whirlpool CF is simulated using the round
function of AES. To make the veriﬁcation practical, the experiments aim for
partial matching instead of full-state matching, while preserving the complexity
gain. Concretely, the goal is to match m bits with complexity max{232 , 2m−8 }.
Please refer to https://github.com/MITM-AES-like/Whirlpool_7R for results
on m ∈ {36, 40, 44, 48}.


The attack on 6-round Whirlpool. When searching on the full-size version
(Nrow ×Ncol = 8×8), results with asymmetric patterns were found. One example
is depicted in Fig. 12. Following the conﬁguration, one can devise an attack on
6-round of Whirlpool with better complexity than previous ones. The concrete
                          −
                          →         ←
                                    −          −→           →←
attack conﬁguration is db = 9, dr = 24, dgb = 15, m = 24, ς = 28 , and
←−     ←→
dgr = dgbr = 0. Accordingly, the attack complexity on the full-size version of
6-round Whirlpool is ς 64 · max(ς −24−15 + ς −(9) + ς −(24−15) ) = 2440 . The memory
required is 224×8 = 2192 . The procedures to compute the initial values of neutral
bytes for both directions are relatively simpler than that of the above attack on
7-round. That is because, the cancellation constraints on the Blue is at a single
point, i.e., (#MC2 , #AK2 ). The cancellation constraints on the Red is also at
a single point, i.e., (#MC4 , #AK4 ). As for such constraints, column-by-column
independent computations can be used to derive the initial values of neutral
bytes for both directions.


Conversion from Pseudo-Preimage to Preimage Attacks has been dis-
cussed in previous works. Here, we follow the Two Types of Last Block Attacks
from [30,34]. Denote the time complexity of inverting the reduced-Whirlpool com-
pression function as 2ℓ . A random message fulﬁlls the padding rule of Whirlpool
with probability 2−9 , hence it costs 2ℓ+9 to ﬁnd a right last block. Then an unbal-
anced meet-in-the-middle is carried out between the initial value and the input
chaining value of the last block, which costs 2(512+ℓ)/2 and sums to 2(512+ℓ)/2 +
2ℓ+9 to ﬁnd a long and full preimage. Detailed conversion results are summarized
in Table 1. We note further complexity optimizations are possible, by ﬁnding


                                             24
                                                           #MC0
                                                              BL        #AK0
                                                                           BL


                          #SB0         #MC0                        MC                                   MC
                                                  AKMC                           AK
                                  SB
           GnD                                               (+3   , +0    )                 #KMC−1             k0
                                  SR              AKMC                           AK
                                                                   MC                                   MC

                              MC-RULE(−0    ,−0   )
                              XOR-RULE(−0   ,−0   )        #MC0
                                                              RD        #AK0
                                                                           RD
                                                                                                         (−0    , −0      )


                                                           #MC1
                                                              BL        #AK1
                                                                           BL


                          #SB1         #MC1                        MC                                   MC
                                                  AKMC                           AK
                                  SB

                                  SR
                                                             (+0   , +0    )                  #KMC0             k1
                                                  AKMC                           AK
                                                                   MC                                   MC

                              MC-RULE(−0    ,−0   )
                              XOR-RULE(−0   ,−0   )        #MC1
                                                              RD        #AK1
                                                                           RD
                                                                                                         (−0    , −0      )


                                                           #MC2
                                                              BL        #AK2
                                                                           BL


                          #SB2         #MC2                        MC                                   MC
                                                  AKMC                           AK
                                  SB

                                  SR
                                                             (+0   , +0    )                  #KMC1             k2
                                                  AKMC                           AK
                                                                   MC                                   MC

                              MC-RULE(−4    ,−0   )
                              XOR-RULE(−0   ,−0   )        #MC2
                                                              RD        #AK2
                                                                           RD
                                                                                                         (−0    , −0      )


                                                           #MC3
                                                              BL        #AK3
                                                                           BL


                          #SB3         #MC3                        MC                                   MC
                                                  AKMC                           AK
                                  SB
           BiDir                                             (+0   , +0    )                  #KMC2             k3
                                  SR              AKMC                           AK
                                                                   MC                                   MC

                              MC-RULE(−0    ,−0   )
                              XOR-RULE(−0   ,−3   )        #MC3
                                                              RD        #AK3
                                                                           RD
                                                                                                         (−0    , −0      )


                                                           #MC4
                                                              BL        #AK4
                                                                           BL


                          #SB4         #MC4                        MC                                   MC
                                                  AKMC                           AK
                                  SB

                                  SR
                                                             (+0   , +0    )                  #KMC3             k4
                                                  AKMC                           AK
                                                                   MC                                   MC

                              MC-RULE(−3    ,−0   )                                                                      ←
                                                                                                                         →KSA
                                                                                                                         S
                              XOR-RULE(−0   ,−0   )        #MC4
                                                              RD        #AK4
                                                                           RD                            (+0    , +4      )
                                                                                                         (−0    , −0      )


                                                           #MC5
                                                              BL        #AK5
                                                                           BL


                          #SB5         #MC5                        MC                                   MC
                                                  AKMC                           AK
                                  SB
          MulAK                                              (+0   , +0    )                  #KMC4             k5
                   ←
                   →ENC           SR              AKMC
                   S                                                             AK
                                                                   MC                                   MC
                     (+12   , +4     )
                               MC-RULE(−0   ,−0   )
                              XOR-RULE(−0   ,−4   )        #MC5
                                                              RD        #AK5
                                                                           RD
                                                                                                         (−0    , −0      )


                                                                           T


                          #SB6         #MC6                                                             MC
                                  SB
                                                      MC   Match
                                  SR                                      #SB0                #KMC5             k6

                                 −−→                                                                    MC
                                 End   Match +1




            Config
                                       −
                                       → ←  − →← −→ ←      −− ←  −→
           • (−
              →ι , ←
                   −
                   ι ) = (12 , 8 ) • (db , dr , m , dgb , dgr , dgbr ) = (5           , 1   , 4   , 0   , 3   , 0    )
              −
              → ←   −− ← − −→ →← −→ ←      −− ← −→
           • (db −dgr , dr −dgb , m −dgb −dgr −dgbr ) = (2, 1, 1 )


                             (a) Conﬁguration automatically found
                                                                                           →
                                                                                           −
This implies an attack on the full version (8 × 8) as shown in Fig. 11 with conﬁguration ((db −
←− ←  − −→ →← −→ ←− ←−→
dgr , dr − dgb , m −dgb − dgr − dgbr ) = (8, 4, 4))

Fig. 3: An example of using (2 × 2 of 4 × 4) to search the MITM attack on 7-round
Whirlpool and an equivalent conﬁguration used in the experimental veriﬁcation
                                                                   25
                                                             #MC0
                                                                BL        #AK0
                                                                             BL


                       #SB0                #MC0                      MC                                    MC
                                                    AKMC                            AK
                                     SB

                                     SR
                                                               (+3   , +0       )               #KMC−1             k0
                                                    AKMC                            AK
                                                                     MC                                    MC

                                MC-RULE(−0   ,−0    )
                               XOR-RULE(−0    ,−0   )        #MC0
                                                                RD        #AK0
                                                                             RD
                                                                                                            (−0    , −0       )


                                                             #MC1
                                                                BL        #AK1
                                                                             BL


                       #SB1                #MC1                      MC                                    MC
                                                    AKMC                            AK
                                     SB

                                     SR
                                                               (+0   , +0       )                #KMC0             k1
                                                    AKMC                            AK
                                                                     MC                                    MC

                                MC-RULE(−0   ,−0    )
                               XOR-RULE(−0    ,−0   )        #MC1
                                                                RD        #AK1
                                                                             RD
                                                                                                            (−0    , −0       )


                                                        #MC2   BL    #AK2
                                                                        BL
                                                               C
                                                             C
                       #SB2                #MC2            C
                                                                  MC                                       MC
                                                    AKMC C                          AK
                                     SB

                                     SR
                                                               (+0   , +0       )                #KMC1             k2
                                                    AKMC                            AK
                                                                     MC                                    MC

                                MC-RULE(−4   ,−0    )
                               XOR-RULE(−0    ,−0   )        #MC2
                                                                RD        #AK2
                                                                             RD
                                                                                                            (−0    , −0       )


                                                             #MC3
                                                                BL        #AK3
                                                                             BL


                       #SB3                #MC3                      MC                                    MC
                                                    AKMC                    C       AK
                                     SB

                                     SR
                                                               (+0   , +0       )                #KMC2             k3
                                                    AKMC                            AK
                                                                     MC                                    MC

                                MC-RULE(−0   ,−0    )
                               XOR-RULE(−0    ,−3   )        #MC3
                                                                RD        #AK3
                                                                             RD
                                                                                                            (−0    , −0       )


                                                        #MC4 BL    #AK4
                                                                      BL
                                                        00         00
                                                        00         00
                       #SB4                #MC4         00
                                                                MC
                                                                   00
                                                                                                           MC
                       52                  00       AKMC00 C       00               AK
                                     SB
                          52               00
                             52
                                     SR
                                           00                  (+0
                                                               , +0   )                          #KMC3             k4
                        C       52         00 C     AKMC00         00               AK
                                                              MC                                           MC
                                                        00         00
                                                        00         00                                                       ←
                                                                                                                            →
                                MC-RULE(−3   ,−0    )   00         00                                                       S KSA
                               XOR-RULE(−0    ,−0   )   #MC4
                                                           RD      #AK4 RD                                  (+0    , +4       )
                                                                                                            (−0    , −0       )


                                                             #MC5
                                                                BL        #AK5
                                                                             BL


                       #SB5                #MC5                      MC                                    MC
                                                    AKMC                            AK
                                     SB
               ←
               →                     SR
                                                               (+0   , +0       )                #KMC4             k5
               S ENC                                AKMC                            AK
                                                                     MC                                    MC
                  (+12      , +4     )
                               MC-RULE(−0    ,−0    )
                               XOR-RULE(−0    ,−4   )        #MC5
                                                                RD        #AK5
                                                                             RD
                                                                                                            (−0    , −0       )


                                                                                T


                       #SB6                #MC6                                                            MC
                                     SB
                                                        MC   Match
                                     SR                                     #SB0                 #KMC5             k6

                                     −−→                                                                   MC
                                     End   Match +1




         Config
                                    −
                                    → ←    − →← −→ ←      −− ←  −→
        • (−
           →    ←
                −) = (12 , 8 ) • (d
            ι , ι                     b , dr , m , dgb , dgr , dgbr ) = (4               , 1   , 4   , 0   , 3   , 0    )
           −
           → ←   −− ← − −→ →← −→ ←        −− ← −→
        • (db −dgr , dr −dgb , m −dgb −dgr −dgbr ) = (1, 1, 1 )


                 (b) Equivalent conﬁguration used in the experimental veriﬁcation

Fig. 3: An example of using (2 × 2 of 4 × 4) to search the MITM attack on 7-round
Whirlpool and an equivalent conﬁguration used in the experimental veriﬁcation (cont.)
                                                                     26
pseudo-preimages under multi-target scenarios and utilizing them in the “unbal-
anced meet-in-the-middle” phase as discussed in [14].


4.2   Discussions on the New Attacks

The previous best attack on Whirlpool is up to 6-round [30]. In the 6-round
attack in [30], although the freedom degree in the key states is exploited, the
computational chunks between the key schedule and the encryption data-path
are designed to be almost identical due to the limitation of manual analysis. In
contrast, in the new attack, the computational chunks between the key schedule
and the encryption data-path are largely diﬀerent. Thus, the degree of freedom
in Blue and Red can be relatively more balanced, and the required number of
guessing bytes is relatively less. Consequently, the complexity is better.
    Attacking one more round than the previously best attacked, new strategies
are required on top of those appeared in [30]. In the new 7-round attack, apart
from GnD, ﬂexibly using of equivalent round-keys #KMC or the real round keys k
(MulAK) is critical to save degrees of freedom. Moreover, complex non-linear con-
straints must be imposed on Blue cells to let Blue propagates towards backward
besides forward (BiDir), and then cancel their impacts on Red-attribute prop-
agation. Thus, eﬃcient procedure (e.g., the local meet-in-the-middle procedure)
for obtaining initial values of neutral cells fulﬁlling the non-linear constraints is
necessary here.


5     Application to Preimage Attacks on Grøstl

Grøstl, proposed by Gauravaram et al. in [12], is one of the ﬁve ﬁnalists of SHA-3
competition hosted by NIST. Grøstl adopts a double-pipe design, i.e., the size of
the chaining value, which is 2n-bit, is twice as the hash size, which is n-bit. For
Grøstl-256, the hash size is 256 bits, and for Grøstl-512, it is 512 bits. Two 2n-bit
AES-like permutations P and Q are employed to build the CF and OT. Please
refer to Sect. C.1 or [12] for a detailed description of Grøstl.


5.1   New Attacks Resulted from Applying the MILP Modeling

Applying the MILP modeling approach described in Sect. 3 on the OT (and on
the P (Hi ) ⊕ Hi part of the CF) of Grøstl-256 and Grøstl-512, new attacks are
found on 6-round and 8-round, respectively. Besides, many eﬃcient attacks on
shorter rounds are found.
    For the 6-round attack on the OT of Grøstl-256, GnD is the essential that
enables to cover one more attacked round than previous 5-round attacks [34];
BiDir is the essential that enables better complexity than previous 6-round at-
tacks [24]. Besides, many inferior attacks than the presented best one on 6-round
Grøstl-256 are found. For those inferior attacks, the computation of initial values
of neutral bytes is relatively easier, but the complexity of the entire attack is


                                         27
higher. Thus, a non-trivial procedure to compute the initial structure (initial
values of neutral bytes) is essential for achieving the best complexity.
    For the 8-round attack on the OT of Grøstl-512, GnD is the essential that en-
ables to achieve better complexity than the previous 8-round attack [34]. Besides,
compared to the 8-round attack in [34], in the presented attack, the initial struc-
ture covers one more round (4 rounds) by allowing one attribute-propagation
conceding to the opposite attribute-propagation in both directions.
    The conﬁgurations of various attacks can be found in Figures 5, 6, 7, 8, 16, 17,
14, 15. The concrete attack procedures on 6-round OT of Grøstl-256 and 8-round
OT of Grøstl-512 are presented in Sect. C.

Conversion to Pseudo-Preimage Attacks. The attacks on the OT of
Grøstl can be converted into pseudo-preimage attacks on Grøstl combining with
similar attacks on the P (H) ⊕ H of the CF using the conversion method in [34].
The complexity of the converted pseudo-preimage attacks are summarized in
Table 1. More details about the conversion can be found in Sect. F

5.2    Discussions on the New Attacks
An interesting feature of the best attack on 6-round Grøstl-256 depicted in Fig. 5
is that, with necessary guessing, the computation of Blue covers the full 6-round.
That is, the Blue propagates to backward besides forward and contributes to de-
grees of matching from both sides. Besides, like the attack on 7-round Whirlpool,
it requires a non-trivial local meet-in-the-middle procedure to compute initial
values of neutral bytes.
    Note that, obtaining the previous best attacks on Grøstl, the work in [34]
has already been assisted with automatic searching, and the 5-round attack on
Grøstl-256 in [34] was claimed to be optimal. However, the optimality hold only
in a restricted search space, apart from lacking the consideration of the GnD
technique. In contrast, the presented 5-round attacks on Grøstl-256 in Figures 14
and 15 achieve better complexity than that in [34] and is optimal in an expanded
search space where BiDir and GnD are considered.


6     Applications to Collision and Key-recovery Attacks
The MILP models for searching for the best preimage attacks can be directly
transformed to search for the best collision attacks on hash functions and key-
recovery attacks on block ciphers. For collision attacks, according to the analysis
in Sect. 3.5, what needs to be done is to simply restrict the matching point to
be at the last round and add constraints shown in Eq. 13. Applying to Grøstl’s
OT, AES-hashing, Kiasu-BC-hashing 7 , new and improved attacks were found.
    For key-recovery attacks, upon the MILP models for preimage attack, one
simply needs to constraint that the degrees of freedom in both forward and
7
    Kiasu-BC [20] is a tweakable block cipher, the only diﬀerence with AES-128 is XOR-
    ing a 64-bit tweak value to the ﬁrst two rows of the state after each AddRoundKey.


                                          28
backward only source from the key states, relax the degrees of matching such
that it is not included in the objective but simply be non-zero 8 , and constraint
that the plaintext or ciphertext contains only Red and Gray cells or only Blue
and Gray cells. Besides, the objective can be set to maximize the number of Gray
cells in the plaintext or ciphertext, which can optimize data complexity. Applying
to SKINNY-n-3n, improvements in terms of time complexity (see Fig. 23) or data
complexity (see Fig. 24 ) upon the attack in [10] on 23-round reduced version
were obtained. In Sect. F, visualizations of representative attack conﬁgurations
are presented. The complexity of the attacks are summarized in Table 1.


Acknowledgements

We thank anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments. This research is par-
tially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grants
No. 62172410, 61802400, 61732021, 61802399, 61961146004), the National Key
R&D Program of China (Grants No. 2018YFA0704704, 2018YFA0704701), the
Youth Innovation Promotion Association of Chinese Academy of Sciences; Nanyang
Technological University in Singapore under Grant 04INS000397C230, Ministry
of Education in Singapore under Grants RG91/20 and MOE2019-T2-1-060; the
Gopalakrishnan – NTU Presidential Postdoctoral Fellowship 2020; the Major
Program of Guangdong Basic and Applied Research (Grant No. 2019B030302008),
Shandong Province Key R&D Project (Nos. 2020ZLYS09 and 2019JZZY010133).


References

 1. Alliance, ZigBee. ZigBee 2007 speciﬁcation. Online: http://www.zigbee.org/, 2007.
 2. K. Aoki and Y. Sasaki. Preimage attacks on one-block MD4, 63-step MD5 and
    more. In R. M. Avanzi, L. Keliher, and F. Sica, editors, SAC 2008, volume 5381
    of LNCS, pages 103–119. Springer, Heidelberg, Aug. 2009.
 3. J.-P. Aumasson, W. Meier, and F. Mendel. Preimage attacks on 3-pass HAVAL
    and step-reduced MD5. In R. M. Avanzi, L. Keliher, and F. Sica, editors, SAC
    2008, volume 5381 of LNCS, pages 120–135. Springer, Heidelberg, Aug. 2009.
 4. Z. Bao, L. Ding, J. Guo, H. Wang, and W. Zhang. Improved meet-in-the-middle
    preimage attacks against AES hashing modes. IACR Trans. Symm. Cryptol.,
    2019(4):318–347, 2019.
 5. Z. Bao, X. Dong, J. Guo, Z. Li, D. Shi, S. Sun, and X. Wang. Automatic search of
    meet-in-the-middle preimage attacks on AES-like hashing. In A. Canteaut and F.-
    X. Standaert, editors, EUROCRYPT 2021, Part I, volume 12696 of LNCS, pages
    771–804. Springer, Heidelberg, Oct. 2021.
 6. P. S. L. M. Barreto and V. Rijmen.                 The WHIRLPOOL Hashing
    Function. http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.529.
    3184&rep=rep1&type=pdf, 2000. Revised in 2003.
8
    In MITM key-recovery attack, the degree of matching can be eﬃciently increased
    using simultaneous matching with multiple plaintext/ciphertext pairs [11].


                                        29
 7. A. Bogdanov and C. Rechberger. A 3-subset meet-in-the-middle attack: Crypt-
    analysis of the lightweight block cipher KTANTAN. In A. Biryukov, G. Gong, and
    D. R. Stinson, editors, SAC 2010, volume 6544 of LNCS, pages 229–240. Springer,
    Heidelberg, Aug. 2011.
 8. C. Bouillaguet, P. Derbez, and P.-A. Fouque. Automatic search of attacks on round-
    reduced AES and applications. In P. Rogaway, editor, CRYPTO 2011, volume 6841
    of LNCS, pages 169–187. Springer, Heidelberg, Aug. 2011.
 9. J. Daemen and V. Rijmen. The Design of Rijndael: AES - The Advanced Encryp-
    tion Standard. Information Security and Cryptography. Springer, 2002.
10. X. Dong, J. Hua, S. Sun, Z. Li, X. Wang, and L. Hu. Meet-in-the-middle attacks re-
    visited: Key-recovery, collision, and preimage attacks. In T. Malkin and C. Peikert,
    editors, CRYPTO 2021, Part III, volume 12827 of LNCS, pages 278–308, Virtual
    Event, Aug. 2021. Springer, Heidelberg.
11. T. Fuhr and B. Minaud. Match box meet-in-the-middle attack against KATAN. In
    C. Cid and C. Rechberger, editors, FSE 2014, volume 8540 of LNCS, pages 61–81.
    Springer, Heidelberg, Mar. 2015.
12. P. Gauravaram, L. R. Knudsen, K. Matusiewicz, F. Mendel, C. Rechberger,
    M. Schläﬀer, and S. S. Thomsen. Grøstl a SHA-3 candidate. http://www.groestl.
    info/Groestl.pdf, March 2011.
13. H. Gilbert and T. Peyrin. Super-sbox cryptanalysis: Improved attacks for AES-like
    permutations. In S. Hong and T. Iwata, editors, FSE 2010, volume 6147 of LNCS,
    pages 365–383. Springer, Heidelberg, Feb. 2010.
14. J. Guo, S. Ling, C. Rechberger, and H. Wang. Advanced meet-in-the-middle preim-
    age attacks: First results on full Tiger, and improved results on MD4 and SHA-2. In
    M. Abe, editor, ASIACRYPT 2010, volume 6477 of LNCS, pages 56–75. Springer,
    Heidelberg, Dec. 2010.
15. J. Guo, T. Peyrin, and A. Poschmann. The PHOTON family of lightweight hash
    functions. In P. Rogaway, editor, CRYPTO 2011, volume 6841 of LNCS, pages
    222–239. Springer, Heidelberg, Aug. 2011.
16. J. Guo, T. Peyrin, A. Poschmann, and M. J. B. Robshaw. The LED block cipher.
    In B. Preneel and T. Takagi, editors, CHES 2011, volume 6917 of LNCS, pages
    326–341. Springer, Heidelberg, Sept. / Oct. 2011.
17. J. Guo, C. Su, and W. Yap. An Improved Preimage Attack against HAVAL-3. Inf.
    Process. Lett., 115(2):386–393, 2015.
18. A. Hosoyamada and Y. Sasaki. Finding hash collisions with quantum computers by
    using diﬀerential trails with smaller probability than birthday bound. In A. Can-
    teaut and Y. Ishai, editors, EUROCRYPT 2020, Part II, volume 12106 of LNCS,
    pages 249–279. Springer, Heidelberg, May 2020.
19. ISO/IEC. 10118-2:2010 Information technology Security techniques – Hash-
    functions – Part 2: Hash-functions using an n-bit block cipher. 3rd ed., Inter-
    national Organization for Standardization, Geneve, Switzerland, October, 2010.
20. J. Jean, I. Nikolic, and T. Peyrin. Tweaks and keys for block ciphers: The
    TWEAKEY framework. In P. Sarkar and T. Iwata, editors, ASIACRYPT 2014,
    Part II, volume 8874 of LNCS, pages 274–288. Springer, Heidelberg, Dec. 2014.
21. M. Lamberger, F. Mendel, C. Rechberger, V. Rijmen, and M. Schläﬀer. Rebound
    distinguishers: Results on the full Whirlpool compression function. In M. Mat-
    sui, editor, ASIACRYPT 2009, volume 5912 of LNCS, pages 126–143. Springer,
    Heidelberg, Dec. 2009.
22. G. Leurent. MD4 is not one-way. In K. Nyberg, editor, FSE 2008, volume 5086 of
    LNCS, pages 412–428. Springer, Heidelberg, Feb. 2008.


                                          30
23. J. Li, T. Isobe, and K. Shibutani. Converting meet-in-the-middle preimage at-
    tack into pseudo collision attack: Application to SHA-2. In A. Canteaut, editor,
    FSE 2012, volume 7549 of LNCS, pages 264–286. Springer, Heidelberg, Mar. 2012.
24. B. Ma, B. Li, R. Hao, and X. Li. Improved (pseudo) preimage attacks on reduced-
    round GOST and Grøstl-256 and studies on several truncation patterns for AES-
    like compression functions. In K. Tanaka and Y. Suga, editors, IWSEC 15, volume
    9241 of LNCS, pages 79–96. Springer, Heidelberg, Aug. 2015.
25. B. Preneel, R. Govaerts, and J. Vandewalle. Hash functions based on block ciphers:
    A synthetic approach. In D. R. Stinson, editor, CRYPTO’93, volume 773 of LNCS,
    pages 368–378. Springer, Heidelberg, Aug. 1994.
26. Y. Sasaki. Meet-in-the-middle preimage attacks on AES hashing modes and an
    application to Whirlpool. In A. Joux, editor, FSE 2011, volume 6733 of LNCS,
    pages 378–396. Springer, Heidelberg, Feb. 2011.
27. Y. Sasaki and K. Aoki. Preimage attacks on 3, 4, and 5-pass HAVAL. In J. Pieprzyk,
    editor, ASIACRYPT 2008, volume 5350 of LNCS, pages 253–271. Springer, Hei-
    delberg, Dec. 2008.
28. Y. Sasaki and K. Aoki. Preimage attacks on step-reduced MD5. In Y. Mu,
    W. Susilo, and J. Seberry, editors, ACISP 08, volume 5107 of LNCS, pages 282–296.
    Springer, Heidelberg, July 2008.
29. Y. Sasaki and K. Aoki. Finding preimages in full MD5 faster than exhaustive
    search. In A. Joux, editor, EUROCRYPT 2009, volume 5479 of LNCS, pages
    134–152. Springer, Heidelberg, Apr. 2009.
30. Y. Sasaki, L. Wang, S. Wu, and W. Wu. Investigating fundamental security re-
    quirements on Whirlpool: Improved preimage and collision attacks. In X. Wang
    and K. Sako, editors, ASIACRYPT 2012, volume 7658 of LNCS, pages 562–579.
    Springer, Heidelberg, Dec. 2012.
31. S. Sun, L. Hu, P. Wang, K. Qiao, X. Ma, and L. Song. Automatic security eval-
    uation and (related-key) diﬀerential characteristic search: Application to SIMON,
    PRESENT, LBlock, DES(L) and other bit-oriented block ciphers. In P. Sarkar
    and T. Iwata, editors, ASIACRYPT 2014, Part I, volume 8873 of LNCS, pages
    158–178. Springer, Heidelberg, Dec. 2014.
32. L. Wang and Y. Sasaki. Finding preimages of Tiger up to 23 steps. In S. Hong
    and T. Iwata, editors, FSE 2010, volume 6147 of LNCS, pages 116–133. Springer,
    Heidelberg, Feb. 2010.
33. L. Wei, C. Rechberger, J. Guo, H. Wu, H. Wang, and S. Ling. Improved meet-in-
    the-middle cryptanalysis of KTANTAN (poster). In U. Parampalli and P. Hawkes,
    editors, ACISP 11, volume 6812 of LNCS, pages 433–438. Springer, Heidelberg,
    July 2011.
34. S. Wu, D. Feng, W. Wu, J. Guo, L. Dong, and J. Zou. (Pseudo) preimage attack on
    round-reduced Grøstl hash function and others. In A. Canteaut, editor, FSE 2012,
    volume 7549 of LNCS, pages 127–145. Springer, Heidelberg, Mar. 2012.
35. B. Zhang and D. Feng. New guess-and-determine attack on the self-shrinking
    generator. In X. Lai and K. Chen, editors, ASIACRYPT 2006, volume 4284 of
    LNCS, pages 54–68. Springer, Heidelberg, Dec. 2006.
36. J. Zou, W. Wu, S. Wu, and L. Dong. Improved (Pseudo) Preimage Attack and
    Second Preimage Attack on Round-Reduced Grostl Hash Function. J. Inf. Sci.
    Eng., 30(6):1789–1806, 2014.




                                         31
                    Supplementary Material
A      Concrete Inequalities modeling the Propagation rules

Inequalities for MC-RULE that allow each attribute (Blue and Red) conceding to
the opposite attribute propagation by consuming DoF in both directions.
                                      N −1
                                     
                                         ∑ O
                                          row
                                     
                                      (         xi ) + Nrow · ⃗
                                                               ω ≤ Nrow ,
                                    
                                     
        Nrow −1    I                
                                     

 ω = max (ωi ),
  ⃗                                  
                                     
                                          i=0
                                          ∑ I
                                         Nrow −1

         i=0                        
                                     

    ∑
    Nrow −1                          
                                      (                i )) − Niosum · ⃗
                                                 (xi + xO               x ≥ 0,

                                    
                                     
                 −       ·   ≥      
              I
 (         x i )   N row   ⃗
                            x   0,   

                                    
                                     
                                          i=0

    i=0                             
                                         ∑ I
                                        Nrow −1

    ∑
    Nrow −1                          
                                      (                i )) − Brn · ⃗
                                                 (xi + xO            x ≤ (Niosum − Brn ),
                                    
  (         xi ) − ⃗x ≤ Nrow − 1.
              I
                                                  i=0
                                      (15)                                                          (16)

   i=0                                      
                                                ∑ O
                                                Nrow −1

   ∑ I
   Nrow −1                                   
                                              (        yi ) + Nrow · ⃗
                                                                      ω ≤ Nrow ,

                                            
                                             

(         yi ) − Nrow · ⃗
                         y ≥ 0,              
                                             

                                            
                                             
                                                 i=0

   i=0                                      
                                                ∑ I
                                                Nrow −1

   ∑ I
   Nrow −1                                   
                                              (        (yi + yiO )) − Niosum · ⃗
                                                                                y ≥ 0,

                                            
                                             

(         yi ) − ⃗
                  y ≤ Nrow − 1.              
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                                 i=0
      i=0                                    
                                                ∑ I
                                                Nrow −1
                                             
                                                       (yi + yiO )) − Brn · ⃗
                                                                             y ≤ (Niosum − Brn ),
                                              (
                                                  i=0
                            N −1
                           
                             ∑
                              row
                           
                           (     yiO ) − Nrow · ⃗
                                                 y − c⃗x = 0
                           
                                i=0
                                                                   (17)
                           
                              ∑ O
                              Nrow −1
                           
                           (         xi ) − Nrow · ⃗x − cy⃗ = 0
                           
                                i=0
                              ∑Nrow −1
    Note that, Niosum − ( i=0 (xIi + xO     i )) is the total number of Red or White
cells (i.e., active cells as for Red) in the input and output columns. Similarly,
            ∑Nrow −1 I
Niosum − ( i=0       (yi + yiO )) is the total number of Blue or White cells (i.e.,
active cells as for Blue). They are constrained by the branch number Brn of
MixColumns.

Inequalities for MATCH-RULE. For concrete formalization of MATCH-RULE, the in-
volved variables include the binary variables that indicate the attribute of each
                                                                                      −−→
cell in the input and output columns (the corresponding columns in End and
←−−                            ←−−K        −−→KMC
End and also the key state End or End             ), i.e., (xIi , yiI ), (xO     O      K    K
                                                                            i , yi ), (xi , yi ),
                                       I    O  K    E⊕K                   I            O
and auxiliary binary variables ωi , ωi , ωi , ωi           , where ωi (resp. ωi ) indi-
cates whether the i-th cell in the input state I (resp. output state O) of the
MixColumns is White; ωiK indicates whether the i-th cell in involved key state K
is White; and ωiE⊕K is deﬁned by ωiE⊕K = OR(ωiI , ωiK ) for i ∈ {0, 1, . . . , n − 1}.
                                             →←
Besides, one need the general variable m i to represent the degree of matching
in column i, for i ∈ {0, 1, . . . , Ncol − 1}.


                                                32
             −−→                                  ←−−                  −−→
   Suppose EndKMC has fewer White cells than EndK and thus using End ⊕
−−→KMC                                                           →←
End       as the key addition, then, the concrete constraints on m i are as in
Eq. (18).
                       row −1
                      N∑
→←
m i = max(0, Nrow −               E⊕K
                                (ωi·Nrow +j
                                               O
                                            + ωi·Nrow +j
                                                         )) for i ∈ {0, 1, . . . , Ncol − 1}(18)
                       j=0



B    Summary of Notations

                                      Notations
Blue ( )       active in the forward chunk
Red ( )        active in the backward chunk
Gray ( )       known constant in both chunks
White ( )      unknown in both chunks
Black ( )      any of Blue ( ), Red ( ), Gray ( ), White ( )
Cyan ( )       guessed for forward chunks
Pink ( )       guessed for backward chunks
Green ( )      guessed for both forward and backward chunks
Violet ( )     degree of matching
←
→ENC
 S             starting state in the encryption data path
←
→KSA
 S             starting state in the key-schedule data path
−−→
End            ending state for the forward computation
←−−
End            ending state for the backward computation
                                                        ←
                                                        →
BLENC          subset of N , index of Blue cells ( ) in S ENC , BLENC ∩ RDENC = ∅
                                                        ←
                                                        →
BLKSA          subset of N , index of Blue cells ( ) in S KSA , BLKSA ∩ RDKSA = ∅
                                                       ←
                                                       →
RDENC          subset of N , index of Red cells ( ) in S ENC , RDENC ∩ BLENC = ∅
                                                       ←
                                                       →
RDKSA          subset of N , index of Red cells ( ) in S KSA , BLKSA ∩ RDKSA = ∅
                                                        ←
                                                        →
               subset of N , index of Gray cells ( ) in S ENC ,
GY ENC
               GY ENC = N − BLENC ∪ RDENC
                                                        ←
                                                        →
               subset of N , index of Gray cells ( ) in S KSA ,
GY KSA
               GY KSA = N − BLKSA ∪ RDKSA
                                      Encoding
               0-1 variables to encode the color (attribute) of the ith cell of a state S
               (1, 0): Blue cell ( )
xS      S
 i and yi      (0, 1): Red cell ( )
               (1, 1): Gray cell ( )
               (0, 0): White cell ( )
               a binary variable, indicating a cell can be computed in the forward
x
               chunk; is Blue or Gray
               a binary variable, indicating a cell can be computed in the backward
y
               chunk; is Red or Gray White




                                              33
 β       a binary variable, indicating a cell is Gray ( )
 ω       a binary variable, indicating a cell is White
⃗x       a binary variable, indicating cells in a column all are Blue/Gray
 ⃗
 y       a binary variable, indicating cells in a column all are Red/Gray
 ω
 ⃗       a binary variable, indicating a column exists White cell
 −
 →ι      −
         →ι = |BLENC | + |BLKSA |, the initial degrees of freedom for the forward
 ←
 −ι      ←
         −ι = |RDENC | + |RDKSA |, the initial degrees of freedom for the backward
         −
         → −
−
→        d =→
          b    ι −−→σ , the accumulated coniosumed degrees of freedom from
σ
         the forward
         ←−
←
−        dr = ←−
               ι −← −, the accumulated coniosumed degrees of freedom from
                    σ
σ
         the backward
         the binary variable indicating whether to coniosume a degree of
cx
         freedom from the forward in XOR-RULE
         the binary variable indicating whether to consume a degree of
cy
         freedom from the backward in XOR-RULE
         the general variable for the number of consumed degrees of freedom
c⃗x
         from the forward in MC-RULE
         the general variable for the number of consumed degrees of freedom
cy⃗
         from the backward in MC-RULE
−
→
db       the degrees of freedom for the forward computation
←−
dr       the degrees of freedom for the backward computation
→←
 m       the degrees of matching
−→
dgb      the number of cells only guessed to be Blue (forward computation)
←−
dgr      be the number of cells only guessed to be Red (backward computation)
←→
dgbr     be the number of cells guessed to be both Blue and Red
τObj     the auxiliary variable to set the objective function
                            Cipher Speciﬁcation
Nrow     the number of rows in the state of the compression function
Ncol     the number of columns in the state of the compression function
         the number of bits in each cell of the state of the compression
c
         function; in targeted ciphers of this work, it is 8
         the number of possible values of a cell, i.e., ς = 2c ; in targeted ciphers
ς
         of this work, it is 28
         n = Nrow · Ncol , the number of cells in the state of the compression
n
         function
         the total number of cells in the input and output of the MC on one
Niosum
         column, Niosum = 2 · Nrow .
         Brn = Nrow + 1, the branch number of the MDS matrix used in the
Brn
         compression function
           Notations used in descriptions of concrete attacks
         executing the MixColumns operation on a single column or on multiple
MC
         columns
SB       executing the SubBytes operation on a single cell or on multiple cells



                                   34
SR                       executing the ShiftRows operation on a single cell or on multiple cells
     r                   the state before going through SubBytes (SB) at the r-th round in the
#SB
                         encryption data-path
     r                   the state before going through ShiftRows (SR) at the r-th round in the
#SR
                         encryption data-path
      r                  the state before going through MixColumns (MC) at the r-th round in
#MC
                         the encryption data-path
      r                  the state before going through AddRoundKey (AK) at the r-th round in
#AK
                         the encryption data-path
        r                the state before going through SubBytes (SB) at the r-th round in the
#KSB
                         key-schedule
        r                the state before going through ShiftRows (SR) at the r-th round in the
#KSR
                         key-schedule
         r               the state before going through MixColumns (MC) at the r-th round in
#KMC
                         the key-schedule
kr                       the r-th round-key
S[i, j, · · · ]          the i-th, j-th, · · · cells of a state (in the order of column ﬁrst)
S[i]                     the i-th cell of a state (in the order of column ﬁrst)
Scoli                    the i-th column of a state
Scol{i,j,··· }           the i-th, j-th, · · · , columns of a state S
Scoli [j]                the j-th cell in the i-th column of a state S
Scoli [j1 , j2 , · · · ] the j1 -th, j2 -th, · · · , cells in the i-th column of a state S
S[i j]                   the j-th cell in the i-th column of a state S, shorten for Scoli [j]
∥                        concatenation
SSR−1 (coli )            the cells in the i-th diagonal of the state S
SSR(coli )               the cells in the i-th anti-diagonal of the state S
                         using values of the a-th, b-th, c-th, d-th cells in the array of (input ∥
MCabcde                  output) of the MC to derive the value of the e-th cell according to
                         Property 1
                         using  values of the Nrow cells in the array of (input ∥ output) of the MC
MC∗
                         to derive the value of an additional cell according to Property 1


C     Concrete Procedure of the Preimage Attack on
      6-round and 8-round OTs of Grøstl-256 and Grøstl-512

C.1    Description of Grøstl

Grøstl, proposed by Gauravaram et al. in [12], is one of the ﬁve ﬁnalists of SHA-3
competition hosted by NIST. Grøstl adopts a double-pipe design, i.e., the size of
the chaining value, which is 2n-bit, is twice as the hash size, which is n-bit. For
Grøstl-256, the hash size is 256 bits, and for Grøstl-512, it is 512 bits.
   Two 2n-bit AES-like permutations P and Q are employed to build the com-
pression function (CF) and output transformation (OT). The P and Q work on
8 × 8 sized state for Grøstl-256 and 8 × 16 sized state for Grøstl-512. For Grøstl-
256, they consist of 10 AES-like rounds; and for Grøstl-512, they consist of 14


                                               35
AES-like rounds. Concretely, the round function of P and Q is made up of 4
operations, i.e., SubBytes (SB), ShiftRows (SR), MixColumns (MC), AddRoundCon-
stants (AC). The ShiftRows (SR) of P cyclically shifts the i-th row leftwards for j
bytes. For P of Grøstl-256, j is in (0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7), while for P of Grøstl-512, j is
in (0,1,2,3,4,5,6,11). Since the ShiftRows (SR) operation for P and Q is diﬀerent
and Q is not involved in our attack, details of Q are skipped.
    The compression function of Grøstl built from P and Q is written as: Hi =
P (Hi−1 ⊕ mi ) ⊕ Q(mi ) ⊕ Hi−1 (i ≥ 1), where Hi is the chaining value, and mi
is the message block. After processing all the message blocks, the last chaining
value serves as the input of the output transformation, which is

                           Ω(X) = T runcn (P (X) ⊕ X).

The right half of P (x) ⊕ X is the output hash value (refer to Fig. 4).


                                                              truncated
          Mi           Q



          Hi                       Hi+1   X        P
                       P




      Fig. 4: Grøstl’s compression function (CF) and output transformation (OT)




C.2     The preimage attack on 6-round OT of Grøstl-256.

Fig. 5 shows one of the attack conﬁgurations on 6-round OT of Grøstl-256. The
following of this section describes how to use this conﬁguration to launch concrete
attack on 6-round OT of Grøstl-256.

To compute initial values of neutral bytes in Red one can adopt a local meet-in-
the-middle procedure as speciﬁed in Algorithm 2, which is similar to Algorithm 1.
    Concretely, in the conﬁguration of the attack in Fig. 5, the degree of free-
dom for the forward computation is the bottleneck; there are four bytes extra
degrees of freedom for the backward that can be ﬁxed for the ease of comput-
ing initial values of backward neutral bytes (in Red). Thus, we ﬁx the value
of four Red cells in #MC2 , i.e., #MC2col0 [6, 7], #MC2col1 [5, 6], as indicated by C .
In Algorithm 2, the focus is on cancellation constraints among states {#MC2 ,
     2      3       3     3
#AC , #SB , #MC , #AC }. The procedure starts from guessing eight free cells
in the ﬁrst two columns of #MC2 and four cells in each pair of columns in #MC3 ,
computes other undetermined cells using constant impacts in #AK3 column-by-
column, and compute back octuple-wisely to match at constant cells in #MC2 .
The complexity of this procedure is 2128 computations and 2128 blocks of mem-
ory.


                                              36
                      #SB0                   #MC0                          #AC0                                       #SB0                  #MC0                           #AC0


                                  SB                         MC                                                                     SB                        MC
BiDir
                                  SR                                                                                                SR


                                              −−→                                ←−−
                                              End        Match                   End                                                                   (−0    ,−0    ) (+0      ,+0        )


                      #SB1                   #MC1                          #AC1                                       #SB1                  #MC1                           #AC1


                                  SB                         MC                                                                     SB                        MC

                                  SR                                                                                                SR



                                                      (−0    ,−0    ) (+0       ,+0    )                                                              (−24     ,−0   )(+0       ,+0        )


                      #SB2                   #MC2                          #AC2                                       #SB2                  #MC2                           #AC2


                                  SB                         MC                                                                     SB                        MC

                                  SR                                                                                                SR
                                         C
         ←
         →ENC                          C C
         S                             C
                (+4    ,+36   )        (+0     ,+0   ) (−0   ,−0    )                                                                                  (−0    ,−0    ) (+0      ,+0        )


                      #SB3                   #MC3                           #AC3                                      #SB3                  #MC3                           #AC3
                                                                              C   C
                                                                                C   C
                                                                                  C   C
                                  SB                         MC         C           C                                               SB                        MC
                                                                          C           C              BiDir
                                  SR                                                                                                SR
                                                                        C   C
                                                                          C   C
                                                                            C   C
                                       (+0     ,+0   )(−0    ,−16   )                                                                                 (−12    ,−12       (+0
                                                                                                                                                                         )      ,+0        )


                      #SB4                   #MC4                          #AC4                                       #SB4                  #MC4                           #AC4


                                  SB                         MC                                                                     SB                        MC
                                                                                                     BiDir
                                  SR                                                                                                SR

                                                                                                              ←
                                                                                                              →
                                                                                                              S ENC
                                       (+0     ,+0   ) (−0   ,−0    )                                             (+48   ,+16   )        (+0    ,+0   ) (−9   ,−1    )


                      #SB5                   #MC5                          #AC5                                       #SB5                  #MC5                           #AC5


                                                                                               AT                                                                                              AT
                                  SB                         MC                                                                     SB                        MC
 GnD                                                                                                 BiDir
                                  SR                                                            T                                   SR                                                          T

                                                                                                                                               −−→                                   ←−−
                                       (+12    ,+0   )(−0    ,−0    )                                                                          End        Match                      End

        Config                                                                                               Config
    • (−
       →    ←
            −) = (4
        ι , ι          , 36   )                                                                          • (−
                                                                                                            →    ←
                                                                                                                 −) = (48
                                                                                                             ι , ι           , 16    )
       −
       → ←   − →← −→ ←      −− ←  −→                                                                        −
                                                                                                            → ←   − →← −→ ←      −− ←  −→
    • (db , dr , m , dgb , dgr , dgbr ) = (4  , 20 , 16 , 12              , 0    , 0       )             • (db , dr , m , dgb , dgr , dgbr ) = (3  , 3 , 3 , 0  , 0            , 0    )
       −
       → ←   −− ← − −→ →← −→ ←          −
                                        − ←  −
                                             →                                                              −
                                                                                                            → ←   −− ← − −→ →← −→ ←          −
                                                                                                                                             − ←  −
                                                                                                                                                  →
    • (db −dgr , dr −dgb , m −dgb −dgr −dgbr ) = (4, 8, 4)                                               • (db −dgr , dr −dgb , m −dgb −dgr −dgbr ) = (3, 3, 3)



Fig. 5: An example of the MITM attack on the OT of the 6-round Fig. 6: An example of the MITM attack on P (H ′ ) ⊕ H ′ in the CF of
Grøstl-256                                                     the 6-round Grøstl-256 (without guessing)




                                                                                                    37
The Whole Attack Procedure (refer to Fig. 5). First, ﬁx the value of 16 Gray cells
in #MC2col{0,1,3,4,5,6} (including the four C cells #MC2col0 [6, 7], #MC2col1 [5, 6]); ﬁx
the value of 16 impacts on C-marked Blue cells in #AC3 . With these constants,
compute the initial values of neutral bytes in Red by Algorithm 2, and obtain a
           ←−−
hash table TInit .
 1. For a new value of the 12 Gray cells in #MC2col{2,7} ,
                                                             ←−−
    (a) for each value ←    −
                            v i of Red neutral bytes in TInit , i.e., Red cells in #AC2 ,
                                                          2
          i. with values of Gray cells in #MCcol{2,7} (the constraints imposed
             by other Gray cells in #MC2 have already been fulﬁlled during the
             precomputation of ←        −
                                        v i ), compute backward to #AC0 ;
         ii. from #ACSR−1 (col{1,3,4,5,6,7} ) , derive value ←
                          0                                      −
                                                                 v m of 16 bytes for match-
             ing through MC (2 bytes in each column, refer to [5, 26] for matching
             through MC);
                                                    ←−
        iii. store ← −
                     v i into a look-up table T , with ←       −
                                                               v m as the index.
                           −
                           →
    (b) for each value v i of the four Blue neutral bytes in #MC2 ,
          i. with values of Gray cells in #MC2 , compute backward to get values
             of Blue cells in #AC0 ;
         ii. with values of Gray cells in #MC2 , compute forward to get values of
             Blue cells in #AC2 and #AC3 ;
        iii. XOR the value of constant impacts on C-marked Blue cells in #AC3 ;
             compute forward to #MC5 ,
        iv. for each value −    →v g of the 12 Cyan cells in #MC5 ,
              A. compute the two Blue columns, XOR with the given target, com-
                  pute forward the Blue cells through feed-forward to #MC0 ;
              B. from values of Blue cells in both #MC0 and #AC0 , derive a value
                  −
                  →v m of 16 bytes for matching (i.e., 2 bytes in each column);
                                                                                      ←−→
              C. for each value of Red cells in #AC2 that is stored in entry T [−          v m ],
                 - with values of Blue cells in #AC2 , compute forward to #MC5 ;
                  get the value −  →v ′g of cells at the position of Cyan cells, if −
                                                                                    →
                                                                                    v ′g ̸= −
                                                                                            →v g,
                  go to Step 1(b)iv;
                 - compute forward to get values of all cells without hatching-mark
                  in #AC5 , XORing the given target at the feed-forward point), com-
                  pute through feed-forward to #MC0 , - if the values of White cells
                 without hatching-marks are fully matched with values of Blue
                  and Red cells through MixColumns (values of cells with hatching-
                  marks in #MC0 can be chosen), a full truncated-state match
                  found, output and return; otherwise, go to Step 1;

Complexity. The memory complexity is 2128 (blocks). As for the computational
complexity, it is determined by the following conﬁguration of this attack, i.e.,
                                                                −
                                                                → ←
                                                                  −
n = 8 × 4 = 32 (truncated 4 out of the 8 columns), db = 4, dr = 16 (minus
                                      −→         →←               ←−  ←→
4 from that shown in Fig. 5), dgb = 12, m = 16, ς = 28 , and dgr = dgbr = 0.
Accordingly, the computational complexity of this attack on 6-round Grøstl-256
is ς 32 · max(ς −(4) , ς −(16−12) + ς −(16−12) ) = 228·8 = 2224 .


                                              38
     Note that, the required number of repetitions of the main MITM procedure
       → ←
       −   −
     n−db −dr
is ς        , i.e., ς 12 for this attack conﬁguration. Thus, enumerating all possible
values of 12 Gray cells in #MC2col{2,7} , as done in Step 1, is suﬃcient. This
condition enables to ﬁx values of all other Gray cells in #MC2 and all 16 constant
impacts on C-marked Blue cells in #AC3 , as done at the very beginning of the
attack.


C.3     The preimage attack on 8-round OT of Grøstl-512.

Fig. 7 shows one of the attack conﬁgurations on 8-round OT of Grøstl-512. The
following of this section describes how to use this conﬁguration to launch concrete
attack on 8-round OT of Grøstl-512.
    The whole attack requires a precomputation phase to obtain initial values
of neutral bytes in Blue and in Red for various values of Gray cells and values
of impacts on cells of opposite attributes. Compared to the procedure of Algo-
rithm 2 in the attack on 6-round Grøstl-256, the precomputation procedure in
here is simpler. Concrete procedures can be found in Algorithm 3 and 4. The
complexity of the precomputation for obtaining the values of neutral bytes in
Blue is 228·8 , i.e., 2224 computations and 2224 blocks of memory. That for neutral
bytes in Red is 216·8 , i.e., 2128 computations and 2128 blocks of memory.
                                                                     −−→      ←−−
    During the main attack procedure, the resulted look-up tables TInit and TInit
from Algorithm 3 and 4 will be used to retrive the initial values of neutral bytes
under various values of Gray bytes and values of impacts.

The Main Attack Procedure (refer to Fig. 7).

 1. For each possible value of Gray cells in #MC4 , #AC4 , #AC5 , and value of
    impacts from Blue on C-marked Red cells in #MC3 , and value of impacts
    from Red on C-marked Blue cells in #AC6 ,
    (a) compute the value of Gray cells in #MC5 from that in #AC4 (cell-by-cell)
    (b) use the value of #AC4 [3 7, 4 7, 5 7, 6 7, 8 0] ∥
              3                                                                        9
        #MC [6 0, 6 1, 6 7, 7 0, 7 7, 8 6, 8 7, 9 5, 9 6, 9 7, 10 4, 10 5, 10 6, 10 7]   to look up the
               −−→
        table TInit , retrive the value of 28 Blue neutral cells in #MC4 .
    (c) for each value −  →
                          v i of the 28 Blue neutral cells in #MC4 ,
          i. with the value of Gray cells in #MC4 , #AC4 , #AC5 , compute forward
             to #AC6 ; XOR with values of pre-determined impacts on C-marked
             cells in #AC6 , compute forward to #AC7 ;
         ii. XOR with the value of given target T (truncated out half of the state),
             compute through feed-forward to #MC0 ;
        iii. derive the value −   →v m of 10 (i.e., 2+3+3+2) bytes from #MC0col{7,8,9,10}
             for matching through MC (refer to [5, 26]);
                                                        −
                                                        →
        iv. store − →
                    v i into a look-up table T , with −              →v m as the index.
9
    The notation S[i j] is used to represent the j-th cell in the i-th column of a state S,
    which is the shorten for Scoli [j].


                                                 39
                          #SB0                             #MC0                                          #AC0
                                                                                                                                                  #SB0                             #MC0                                        #AC0

                                           SB                                         MC
                                                                                                                                                                   SB                                      MC
                                           SR
                                                                                                                                                                   SR

                                                              −−→                                                ←−−
                                                              End                    Match                       End
                                                                                                                                                                                                     (−0     , −0    )   (+0    , +0    )
                          #SB1                             #MC1                                          #AC1
                                                                                                                                                  #SB1                             #MC1                                        #AC1

                                           SB                                         MC
GnD                                                                                                                                                                SB                                      MC
                                           SR
                                                                                                                                                                   SR


                                                                               (−0     , −0    )   (+0    , +4    )
                                                                                                                                                                                                     (−0     , −0    )   (+0    , +0    )
                          #SB2                             #MC2                                          #AC2
                                                                                                                                                  #SB2                             #MC2                                        #AC2

                                           SB                                         MC
                                                                                                                                                                   SB                                      MC
                                           SR
                                                                                                                                                                   SR


                                                                               (−0     , −0    )   (+0    , +0    )
                                                                                                                                                                                                 (−10         , −0   )   (+0    , +0    )

                          #SB3                             #MC3                                          #AC3
                                                           C C                                                                                    #SB3                             #MC3                                        #AC3
                                                           C
                                           SB                                         MC
                                                                                                                                                                   SB                                      MC
                                                                      C
                                           SR
                                                                    C C                                                                                            SR
                                                                  C C C
                                                              C C C C C
                                                                               (−14    , −0    )   (+0    , +0    )
                                                                                                                                                                                                 (−31         , −0   )   (+0    , +0    )

                          #SB4                             #MC4                                          #AC4
                                                                                                                                                  #SB4                             #MC4                                        #AC4


                                           SB                                         MC
                                                                                                                                                                   SB                                      MC
BiDir
                                           SR
                                                                                                                                                                   SR
        ←
        →
        S ENC                                                                                                                    ←
                                                                                                                                 →ENC
                                                                                                                                 S
                   (+28    , +72   )                    (+0     , +0      )    (−5    , −45    )
                                                                                                                                           (+44    , +28   )                    (+0   , +0   )   (−0         , −20   )

                          #SB5                             #MC5                                          #AC5
                                                                                                                                                  #SB5                             #MC5                                        #AC5


                                           SB                                         MC
                                                                                                                                                                   SB                                      MC
                                           SR
                                                                                                                                                                   SR


                                                        (+0     , +0      )    (−0    , −16    )                                                                                (+0   , +0   )       (−0     , −5    )

                          #SB6                             #MC6                                          #AC6                                     #SB6                             #MC6                                        #AC6
                                                                                                           C

                                           SB                                         MC                                                                           SB                                      MC
                                           SR                                                                                                                      SR
                                                                                                    C
                                                                                                    C C C C
                                                        (+0     , +0      )    (−0     , −6    )                                                                                (+0   , +0   )       (−0     , −0    )

                          #SB7                             #MC7                                          #AC7                                     #SB7                             #MC7                                        #AC7


                                                                                                                       AT                                                                                                                    AT
                                           SB                                         MC                                                                           SB                                      MC
                                           SR                                                                           T                                          SR                                                                         T

                                                                                                                                                                                      −−→                                              ←−−
                                                        (+0     , +0      )    (−0     , −0    )                                                                                      End              Match                           End

                Config                                                                                                                  Config
                • (−
                   →ι , ←
                        −ι ) = (28  , 72    )                                                                                           • (−
                                                                                                                                           →ι , ←
                                                                                                                                                −ι ) = (44  , 28    )
                   −
                   → ←   − →← −→ ←      −− ←  −→                                                                                           −
                                                                                                                                           → ←   − →← −→ ←      −− ←  −→
                • (db , dr , m , dgb , dgr , dgbr ) = (9  , 5 , 10 , 0        , 4    , 0   )                                            • (db , dr , m , dgb , dgr , dgbr ) = (3  , 3 , 3 , 0  , 0     , 0     )
                   −
                   → ←    −− ←− −→ →← −→ ←          −
                                                    − ←  −
                                                         →                                                                                 −
                                                                                                                                           → ←    −− ←− −→ →← −→ ←          −
                                                                                                                                                                            − ←  −
                                                                                                                                                                                 →
                • (db −dgr , dr −dgb , m −dgb −dgr −dgbr ) = (5, 5, 6)                                                                  • (db −dgr , dr −dgb , m −dgb −dgr −dgbr ) = (3, 3, 3)




Fig. 7: An example of the MITM attack on the OT of the 8-round Fig. 8: An example of the MITM attack on P (H ′ ) ⊕ H ′ in the CF of
Grøstl-512                                                     the 8-round Grøstl-512 (without guessing)




                                                                                                                            40
    (d) use the values of #AC6 [5 6, 5 7, 6 7, 7 7, 8 0, 8 7] ∥ #MC5 [8 0, 8 7, 9 7, 10 7, 11 7] to
                            ←−−
        look up the table TInit , retrive the values of 16 Red neutral cells in #AC5 .
    (e) for each value ← −
                         v i of Red neutral cells in #AC5 ,
          i. with the value of Gray cells in #AC5 , #MC5 , #AC4 , #MC4 , compute
             backward to #MC3 ; XOR with values of pre-determined impacts on
             C-marked cells in #MC3 , compute forward to #AC1 ;
         ii. for each value ← −
                              v g of the 4 Pink cells in #AC1
              A. compute backward to #AC0 ; derive the value ←               −
                                                                             v m of 10 bytes
                            0
                 from #ACcol{7,8,9,10} for matching through MC;
                                                            −
                                                            → −
              B. for each value − →
                                  v stored in entry T [←
                                       i                        v ],
                                                                   m
                  - with values of Red and Gray cells in #MC4 , compute backward
                   to #AC1 ; get the value ←  −
                                              v ′g of cells at the position of Pink cells,
                      ←
                      − ′    ←
                             −
                   if v g ̸= v g , go to Step 1(e)ii;
                  - compute backward to #AC0 , denote the value by ←        −
                                                                            v;
                                                                     4
                  - with values of Red and Gray cells in #MC , compute forward
                  (XORing the given target at the feed-forward point) to #MC0 ,
                   denote the value of cells without hatching-marks by −     →
                                                                             v ; if −
                                                                                    →
                                                                                    v and
                   ←−
                    v can be fully matched through MixColumns (values of cells with
                   hatching-marks in #MC0 can be chosen), a full truncated-state
                   match found, output and return; otherwise, go to Step 1;

Complexity. Due to the precomputation, the memory complexity is 2224 (blocks).
As for the computational complexity, it is determined by the following conﬁg-
uration of this attack. n = 8 × 8 = 64 (truncated 8 out of the 16 columns),
−
→          ←
           −           ←−            →←                     ←− ←→
db = 9, dr = 5, dgr = 4, m = 10, ς = 28 , and dgr = dgbr = 0. Accord-
ingly, the computational complexity of this attack on 8-round Grøstl-512 is
ς 64 · max(ς −(9−4) , ς −(5) , ς −(10−4) ) = 259·8 = 2472 .


D     Compute Initial values of Neutral Bytes in the Attacks

Property 1 (Property of MDS matrix). Known any Nrow out of the 2 · Nrow input
and output elements of the MDS matrix, the remaining Nrow elements can be
computed.




                                               41
Algorithm 1 Compute initial values of forward neutral bytes (in Blue) in the
attack on 7-round Whirlpool (refer to in Fig. 3)
 1: procedure ComputeForwardNeutralBytes
       −−→
 2:    TInit ← ∅
 3:    for all possible values of #AK3 [1, 2] do                                                      ▷ 216
                                     −1
                            MC
            #MC [0, 1, 2, 3] ← #AK [0, 1, 2, 3]
               3                  3
 4:                                                                                ▷ #AK3 [0, 3] are ﬁxed
                                          −1
                               SB
            #SB [0, 5, 10, 15] ← #MC [0, 1, 2, 3]
                3                      3
 5:
 6:         for all possible values of #SB3 [8] do                                 ▷ 28
                        MC46715
 7:                 3
               #SB [9]     ← (#SB [8, 10, 11], #MCC [9])
                                    3              2
                                                            ▷ according to Property 1 a
                          SB
               #MC [8] ← #SB [8]
                     3            3
 8:
                          SB
               #MC [5] ← #SB [9]
                     3            3
 9:
                           push
10:            L#MC3 ← (#MC3 [8, 5])                     ▷ the ﬁnal size |L#MC3 | = 28
                          8,5                                                                   8,5
11:          end for
12:          for all possible values of #SB3 [13] do                                                   ▷ 28
                                MC45706
13:                  3
                #SB [14]   ←                 (#SB3 [12, 13, 15], #MCC2 [12])   ▷ according to Property 1
                                SB
                #MC [9] ← #SB [13]
                      3      3
14:
                        SB
                #MC [6] ← #SB [14]
                   3         3
15:
                                 push
16:             L#MC3 ← (#MC3 [9, 6])                                   ▷ the ﬁnal size |L#MC3 | = 28
                       9,6                                                                      9,6
17:          end for
18:          for all possible values of #SB3 [4] do                                                    ▷ 28
                            MC45627
19:                  3
                #SB [7]  ← (#SB [4, 5, 6], #MC2C [6])
                                                 3
                                                                               ▷ according to Property 1
                        SB
                #MC [4] ← #SB [4]
                    3         3
20:
                         SB
                #MC [11] ← #SB [7]
                    3           3
21:
                         push
22:             L#MC3      ← (#MC3 [4, 11])                            ▷ the ﬁnal size |L#MC3         | = 28
                          4,11                                                                 4,11
23:          end for
24:          for all possible values of #SB3 [2] do                                                    ▷ 28
                            MC45637
25:                  3
                #SB [3]  ← (#SB [0, 1, 2], #MC2C [3])
                                                 3
                                                                               ▷ according to Property 1
                         SB
                #MC [10] ← #SB [2]
                    3           3
26:
                        SB
                #MC [7] ← #SB [3]
                    3         3
27:
                         push
28:             L#MC3      ← (#MC3 [10, 7])                            ▷ the ﬁnal size |L#MC3         | = 28
                          10,7                                                                 10,7
29:          end for
30:          for all (#MC3 [8, 5]) ∈ L#MC3 do                                                          ▷ 28
                                          8,5
31:             for all (#MC3 [9, 6]) ∈ L#MC3 do                                                       ▷ 28
                                                           9,6
                                     MC
32:              a#AK3 [5] ← (0 ∥ #MC3 [5] ∥ #MC3 [6] ∥ 0)[1] ⊕ #AK3 [5]
                              MC
33:              b#AK3 [10] ← (#MC3 [8] ∥ #MC3 [9] ∥ 0 ∥ 0)[2] ⊕ #AK3 [10]
34:              T#MC3          [a#AK3 [5] ∥ b#AK3 [10] ] ← (#MC3 [8, 5, 9, 6]) ▷ expected to
                        8,5,9,6
    have one element in each entry of T#MC3
                                                  8,5,9,6
35:           end for
36:       end for
37:       for all (#MC3 [4, 11]) ∈ L#MC3 do                                              ▷ 28
                                             4,11
38:           for all (#MC [10, 7]) ∈ L#MC3 do
                             3
                                                                                         ▷ 28
                                                             10,7

                    a′#AK3 [5] ← (#MC3 [4] ∥ 0 ∥ 0 ∥ #MC3 [7])[1]
                                     MC
39:
                     b′#AK3 [10] ← (0 ∥ 0 ∥ #MC3 [10] ∥ #MC3 [11])[2]
                                        MC
40:
41:                  for all #MC3 [8, 5, 9, 6] ∈ T#MC3         [a′#AK3 [5] ∥ b′#AK3 [10] ] do   ▷
                                                       8,5,9,6
    expected to have one element in the entry
                         −−→ push
42:                      TInit ← #MC3 [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]      ▷ the ﬁnal size
     −−→
    |TInit | = 2 32

43:                  end for
44:               end for
                                           42
45:          end for
46:     end for
                   −−→
47:     return TInit
48: end procedure

a
    MCabcde represents using values of the a-th, b-th, c-th, d-th cells in the array of (input
    ∥ output) of the MC to derive the value of the e-th cell according to Property 1.
Algorithm 2 Compute values of backward neutral bytes (in Red) in Fig. 5
 1: procedure ComputeBackwardNeutralBytes
       ←−−
 2:    TInit ← ∅, #MC3SR(col{2,7} ) ← ⃗0                           ▷ refer to Fig. 9 for cell index
 3:    for all possible values of #MC2 [0 1, 0 3, 0 4, 0 5, 1 0, 1 2, 1 3, 1 4] do             ▷ 264
                        MC                                     SR◦SB◦AC
 4:            2
           #ACcol
                  {0,1}
                        ← #MCcol{0,1} , #MCSR(col{0,1} ) ← #ACcol{0,1}
                                2             3                                 2

 5:        for all possible values of #MC3 [0 3, 0 4], #MC3 [1 2, 1 3] do                      ▷ 232
                                       ∗
                                  MC
                   #MC [0 5, 0 6] ← (#MC [0 0, 0 1, 0 2, 0 3, 0 4, 0 7], #ACC [0 3, 0 5])
                      3                 3                                   3
 6:                                                                                                 ▷ Property 1
                                     MC∗
                   #MC [1 4, 1 5] ← (#MC [1 0, 1 1, 1 2, 1 3, 1 6, 1 7], #ACC [1 4, 1 6])
                          3                      3                               3
 7:                                                                                                 ▷ Property 1
                                                                       −1
                                                                (SB◦AC)
 8:                    2
                   #AC [3 3, 4 4, 5 5, 6 6, 3 2, 4 3, 5 4, 6 5]     ←        2
                                                                          #MC [0 3, 0 4, 0 5, 0 6, 1 2, 1 3, 1 4, 1 5]
                      push
 9:                L01 ← (#AC2 [3 3, 4 4, 5 5, 6 6, 3 2, 4 3, 5 4, 6 5])       ▷ the ﬁnal size |L01 | = 232
10:            end for
11:            for all possible values of #MC3 [2 1, 2 2], #MC3 [3 0, 3 1] do                                  ▷ 232
                                     MC∗
                   #MC [2 3, 2 4] ← (#MC [2 0, 2 1, 2 2, 2 5, 2 6, 2 7], #ACC [2 5, 2 7])
                          3                      3                          3
12:                                                                                                 ▷ Property 1
                                    ∗
                                  MC
                   #MC [3 2, 3 3] ← (#MC [3 0, 3 1, 3 4, 3 5, 3 6, 3 7], #ACC [3 0, 3 6])
                      3                 3                                   3
13:                                                                                                 ▷ Property 1
                                                                      −1
                                                                (SB◦AC)
14:                    2
                   #AC [3 1, 4 2, 5 3, 6 4, 3 0, 4 1, 5 2, 6 3]     ←      2
                                                                        #MC [2 1, 2 2, 2 3, 2 4, 3 0, 3 1, 3 2, 3 3]
                      push
15:                L23 ← (#AC [3 1, 4 2, 5 3, 6 4, 3 0, 4 1, 5 2, 6 3])
                                     2
                                                                            ▷ the ﬁnal size |L23 | = 232
16:            end for
17:            for all possible values of #MC3 [4 0, 4 1], #MC3 [5 0, 5 1] do                                  ▷ 232
                                     MC∗
                   #MC [4 2, 4 7] ← (#MC [4 0, 4 1, 4 3, 4 4, 4 5, 4 6], #ACC [4 1, 4 7])
                      3                 3                                   3
18:                                                                                                 ▷ Property 1
                                       ∗
                                  MC
                   #MC [5 6, 5 7] ← (#MC [5 0, 5 1, 5 2, 5 3, 5 4, 5 5], #ACC [5 0, 5 2])
                      3                 3                                   3
19:                                                                                                 ▷ Property 1
                                                                      −1
                                                                (SB◦AC)
20:                    2
                   #AC [4 0, 5 1, 6 2, 3 7, 5 0, 6 2, 3 6, 4 7]     ←      2
                                                                        #MC [4 0, 4 1, 4 2, 4 7, 5 0, 5 1, 5 6, 5 7]
                      push
21:                L45 ← (#AC2 [4 0, 5 1, 6 2, 3 7, 5 0, 6 2, 3 6, 4 7])    ▷ the ﬁnal size |L45 | = 232
22:            end for
23:            for all possible values of #MC3 [6 0, 6 5], #MC3 [7 4, 7 5] do                                  ▷ 232
                                     MC∗
                   #MC [6 6, 6 7] ← (#MC [6 0, 6 1, 6 2, 6 3, 6 4, 6 5], #ACC [6 1, 6 3])
                      3                 3                                   3
24:                                                                                                 ▷ Property 1
                                  MC∗
                   #MC [7 6, 7 7] ← (#MC [7 0, 7 1, 7 2, 7 3, 7 4, 7 5], #ACC [7 2, 7 4])
                      3                 3                                   3
25:                                                                                                 ▷ Property 1
                                                                (SB◦AC)−1
26:                    2
                   #AC [6 0, 3 5, 4 6, 5 7, 3 4, 4 5, 5 6, 6 7]     ←        2
                                                                          #MC [6 0, 6 5, 6 6, 6 7, 7 4, 7 5, 7 6, 7 7]
                      push
27:                L67 ← (#AC2 [6 0, 3 5, 4 6, 5 7, 3 4, 4 5, 5 6, 6 7])      ▷ the ﬁnal size |L67 | = 232
28:         end for
29:         for all (#AC2 [3 3, 4 4, 5 5, 6 6, 3 2, 4 3, 5 4, 6 5]) ∈ L01 do                                     ▷ 232
30:              for all (#AC [3 1, 4 2, 5 3, 6 4, 3 0, 4 1, 5 2, 6 3]) ∈ L23 do
                                      2
                                                                                                                 ▷ 232
                          MC
31:                   a ← (#AC [3 0, 3 1, 3 2, 3 3] ∥ 0 ∥ 0 ∥ 0 ∥ 0)[5, 7] ⊕ #MC [3 5, 3 7]
                                       2                                                          2
                         MC
32:                   b ← (0 ∥ #AC2 [4 1, 4 2, 4 3, 4 4] ∥ 0 ∥ 0 ∥ 0)[4, 6] ⊕ #MC2 [4 4, 4 6]
                         MC
33:                   c ← (0 ∥ 0 ∥ #AC2 [5 2, 5 3, 5 4, 5 5] ∥ 0 ∥ 0)[3, 5] ⊕ #MC2 [5 3, 5 5]
                          MC
34:                   d ← (0 ∥ 0 ∥ 0 ∥ #AC2 [6 3, 6 4, 6 5, 6 6] ∥ 0)[2, 4] ⊕ #MC2 [6 2, 6 4]
35:                   T [a               ∥              b              ∥               c        ∥          d]       ←
    (#AC2 [3 3, 4 4, 5 5, 6 6, 3 2, 4 3, 5 4, 6 5, 3 1, 4 2, 5 3, 6 4, 3 0, 4 1, 5 2, 6 3])
36:              end for
37:         end for
38:         for all (#AC2 [4 0, 5 1, 6 2, 3 7, 5 0, 6 2, 3 6, 4 7]) ∈ L45 do                                     ▷ 232
39:              for all (#AC [6 0, 3 5, 4 6, 5 7, 3 4, 4 5, 5 6, 6 7]) ∈ L67 do
                                      2
                                                                                                                 ▷ 232
                        ′ MC
40:                   a ← (0 ∥ 0 ∥ 0 ∥ 0 ∥ #AC [3 4, 3 5, 3 6, 3 7])[5, 7]
                                                               2

                      b′ ← (#AC2 [4 0] ∥ 0 ∥ 0 ∥ 0 ∥ 0 ∥ #AC2 [4 5, 4 6, 4 7])[4, 6]
                           MC
41:
                      c′ ← (#AC2 [5 0, 5 1] ∥ 0 ∥ 0 ∥ 0 ∥ 0 ∥ #AC2 [5 6, 5 7])[3, 5]
                           MC
42:
                      d′ ← (#AC2 [6 0, 6 1, 6 2] ∥ 0 ∥ 0 ∥ 0 ∥ 0 ∥ #AC2 [6 7] ∥ 0)[2, 4]
                           MC
43:
44:                   for all #AC2 [3 3, 4 4, 5 5, 6 6, 3 2, 4 3, 5 4, 6 5, 3 1, 4 2, 5 3, 6 4, 3 0, 4 1, 5 2, 6 3] ∈
    T [a′ ∥ b′ ∥ c′ ∥ d′ ] do
                            ←−− push                                                                    ←−−
45:                         TInit ← #AC2col{0,1,3,4,5,6}                               ▷ the ﬁnal size |TInit | = 2128
46:                   end for                          43
47:              end for
48:         end for
49:     end for
                   ←−−
50:     return TInit
51: end procedure
               #SB2                                       #MC2                                             #AC2
                                                     10                                          00 10          30 40 50 60
                                                01                                               01 11          31 41 51 61
                                                   12                     62                     02 12          32 42 52 62
                                      SB                                             MC
                                                03 13                53                          03 13          33 43 53 63
                                     SR         04 14           44        64   (−0   , −0    )   04 14          34 44 54 64
                                                05 15      35        55                          05 15          35 45 55 65
←
→ENC                                            06 16           46                               06 16          36 46 56 66
S                                               07         37                                    07 17          37 47 57 67
       (+4      , +36            )
               #SB3                                       #MC3                                             #AC3
       00 10       30 40 50 60                  00 10    30 40 50 60                                            30        50
       01 11       31 41 51 61                  01    21 31 41 51    71                                              41        61
       02 12       32 42 52 62                     12 22 32 42    62 72                                                   52        72
                                      SB                                             MC
       03 13       33 43 53 63                  03 13 23 33    53 63                             03                            63
       04 14       34 44 54 64       SR         04 14 24    44 54    7 4 (−0         , −16   )        14                            74
       05 15       35 45 55 65                  05 15    35 45    65 75                          05        25
       06 16       36 46 56 66                  06    26 36    56 66 76                               16        36
       07 17       37 47 57 67                     17 27    47 57 67 77                                    27        47


                                     Fig. 9: Index in Algorithm 2


 Algorithm 3 Compute values of forward neutral bytes (in Blue) in Fig. 7
  1: procedure ComputeForwardNeutralBytes
         −−→
  2:     TInit ← ∅
  3:     for all possible value −→v i of the 28 Blue cells in #MC4 do             ▷ 22×28
                MC
  4:         c0 ← (0 ∥ 0 ∥ 0 ∥ #MCcol3 [3, 4, 5, 6] ∥ 0)[7]
                                      4
                MC
  5:         c1 ← (0 ∥ 0 ∥ #MC4col4 [2, 3, 4, 5, 6] ∥ 0)[7]
                MC
  6:         c2 ← (0 ∥ #MC4col5 [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] ∥ 0 ∥ 0)[7]
                MC
  7:         c3 ← (0 ∥ #MC4col6 [1, 2, 3, 4] ∥ 0 ∥ 0 ∥ 0)[7]
                MC
  8:         c4 ← (#MC4col8 [0, 1, 2] ∥ 0 ∥ 0 ∥ 0 ∥ 0 ∥ 0)[0]
  9:         compute backward cell-by-cell through SB−1 , SR−1 , and AC−1 to get the Blue
     cells in #AC3
                MC−1
 10:         c5 ← (0 ∥ #AC3col6 [1, 2, 3, 4] ∥ 0 ∥ 0 ∥ 0)[0, 1, 7]
                        MC−1
 11:                c6 ← (#AC3col7 [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5] ∥ 0 ∥ 0)[0, 7]
                        MC−1
 12:                c7 ← (#AC3col8 [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6] ∥ 0)[6, 7]
                        MC−1
 13:                c8 ← (0 ∥ #AC3col9 [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6] ∥ 0)[5, 6, 7]
                        MC−1
 14:          c9 ← (0 ∥ 0 ∥ #AC3col10 [2, 3, 4, 5, 6] ∥ 0)[4, 5, 6, 7]
              −−→
 15:          TInit [c0 ∥ c1 ∥ c2 ∥ c3 ∥ c4 ∥ c5 ∥ c6 ∥ c7 ∥ c8 ∥ c9 ] ← −
                                                                         →
                                                                         vi
 16:       end for
                    ←−−
 17:       return TInit
 18:                                                                   ▷ Note that due
     to the linearity of MixColumns, values of Gray cells in involved columns of #MC4
     and #AC3 can be set to zero in this precomputation phase. During the main attack
     phase, in the backward computation, the values of Gray cells will be integrated;
     constant impacts from these values of Gray cells together with the pre-determined
     impacts from the Blue cells are needed to be XORed together to the involved Red
     cells.
 19: end procedure


 Algorithm 4 Compute values of backward neutral bytes (in Red) in Fig. 7
  1: procedure ComputeBackwardNeutralBytes
        ←−−
  2:    TInit ← ∅
  3:    for all possible value ←
                               −
                               v i of the 16 Red cells in #AC5 do              ▷ 22×16
  4:        compute forward cell-by-cell through AC, SB, and SR to get the Red cells in
               6
       #MC
                        MC
  5:               c0 ← (0 ∥ 0 ∥ 0 ∥ #MC6col5 [3, 4, 5, 6] ∥ 0)[6, 7]
                      MC
  6:               c1 ← (0 ∥ 0 ∥ #MC6col6 [2, 3, 4, 5] ∥ 0 ∥ 0)[7]
                      MC
  7:               c2 ← (0 ∥ #MC6col7 [1, 2, 3, 4] ∥ 0 ∥ 0 ∥ 0)[7]
                      MC
  8:               c3 ← (#MC6col8 [0, 1, 2, 3] ∥ 0 ∥ 0 ∥ 0 ∥ 0)[0, 7]
                       MC−1
  9:               c4 ← (#AC5col8 [0, 1, 2, 3] ∥ 0 ∥ 0 ∥ 0 ∥ 0)[0, 7]
                        MC−1
                                                     44
 10:                c5 ← (0 ∥ #AC5col9 [1, 2, 3, 4] ∥ 0 ∥ 0 ∥ 0)[7]
                        MC−1
 11:                c6 ← (0 ∥ 0 ∥ #AC5col10 [2, 3, 4, 5] ∥ 0 ∥ 0)[7]
                        MC−1
 12:       c7 ← (0 ∥ 0 ∥ 0 ∥ #AC5col11 [3, 4, 5, 6] ∥ 0)[7]
           ←−−
 13:       TInit [c0 ∥ c1 ∥ c2 ∥ c3 ∥ c4 ∥ c5 ∥ c6 ∥ c7 ] ← ←
                                                            −
                                                            vi
 14:    end for
                 ←−−
 15:    return TInit
 16: end procedure
E     Visualization of More Attack Conﬁgurations
E.1   Visualization of conﬁgurations facilitated to launch (pseudo-)
      preimage attacks




                                  45
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #KMC−1




                                                                                                                                (AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC)
                                                                                                                                 ←−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
                                                                                                                             #SB0           #MC0            #MC0            #AK0                                         k0


                                                                                                                                                            AKMC                                          AK
                                                                                                                                          SB                                   MC
                                                                                                          GnD
                                                                                  #KMC−1
                                                                                                                                          SR



                                                                                                                                                                       MC-RULE(−0   , −0      )
                                                                                                                                                                      XOR-RULE(−0    , −0      )               (−0    , −0    )
                                  (AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC)                                                                                                                          (+0      , +12   )                #KMC0
                                   ←−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
                                                            −
                    #SB0           #MC0       #MC0       #AK0                         k0
                                        AKMC                  AK
                               SB                   MC
        GnD
                               SR
                                                                                                                                (AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC)
                                                                                                                                 ←−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
                                                   MC-RULE(−0  , −0  )                                                       #SB1           #MC1            #MC1            #AK1                                         k1
                                                  XOR-RULE(−0  , −0  )     (−0    , −0       )
                                                             (+0  , +3     )                                                                                AKMC                                          AK
                                                                                      #KMC0                                               SB                                   MC

                                                                                                                                          SR



                                                                                                                                                                       MC-RULE(−0   , −0      )
                                  (AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC)
                                   ←−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
                                                            −                                                                                                         XOR-RULE(−0    , −0     )                (−0    , −0    )
                    #SB1           #MC1       #MC1       #AK1                         k1                                                                                              (+0     , +0    )                #KMC1
                                        AKMC                  AK
                               SB                   MC

                               SR

                                                   MC-RULE(−0  , −0  )
                                                                                                                                (AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC)
                                                  XOR-RULE(−0  , −0  )     (−0    , −0       )                                   ←−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
                                                                                                                             #SB2           #MC2            #MC2            #AK2                                         k2
                                                             (+0  , +0     )
                                                                                      #KMC1
                                                                                                                                                            AKMC                                          AK
                                                                                                                                          SB                                   MC

                                                                                                                                          SR

                                  (AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC)
                                   ←−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
                                                            −
                    #SB2           #MC2       #MC2       #AK2                         k2                                                                              MC-RULE(−16     , −0    )
                                        AKMC                                                                                                                          XOR-RULE(−0     , −0    )                (−0    , −0    )
                                                              AK
                               SB                   MC                                                                                                                                 (+0    , +0    )                #KMC2

                               SR

                                                   MC-RULE(−4  , −0  )
                                                  XOR-RULE(−0  , −0  )     (−0    , −0       )
                                                             (+0  , +0     )                                                    (AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC)
                                                                                      #KMC2                                      ←−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
                                                                                                                             #SB3           #MC3            #MC3            #AK3                                         k3


                                                                                                                                                            AKMC                                          AK
                                                                                                                                          SB                                   MC
                                                                                                          BiDir
                                  (AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC)                                                                               SR
                                   ←−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
                                                            −
                    #SB3           #MC3       #MC3       #AK3                         k3
                                        AKMC                  AK
                               SB                   MC                                                                                                                 MC-RULE(−0   , −0      )
        BiDir                                                                                                                                                         XOR-RULE(−0   , −12      )               (−0    , −0    )
                               SR                                                                                                                                                     (+0     , +0    )                #KMC3


                                                   MC-RULE(−0  , −0  )
                                                  XOR-RULE(−0  , −3  )     (−0    , −0       )
                                                             (+0  , +0     )
                                                                                      #KMC3
                                                                                                                                (AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC)
                                                                                                                                 ←−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
                                                                                                                             #SB4           #MC4            #MC4            #AK4                                         k4


                                  (AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC)                                                                                                 AKMC                                          AK
                                   ←−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
                                                            −                                                                             SB                                   MC
                    #SB4           #MC4       #MC4       #AK4                         k4
                                                                                                                                          SR
                                        AKMC                  AK
                               SB                   MC                                                                                                                                                                            ←
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  →
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  S KSA

                               SR                                                          ←
                                                                                           →                                                                          MC-RULE(−12     , −0    )                (+0    , +16    )
                                                                                           S KSA                                                                      XOR-RULE(−0     , −0    )                 (−0    , −0   )
                                                                                                                                                                                       (+0    , +0    )                #KMC4
                                                   MC-RULE(−3  , −0  )     (+0    , +4       )
                                                  XOR-RULE(−0  , −0  )     (−0    , −0       )
                                                             (+0  , +0     )
                                                                                      #KMC4


                                                                                                                                (AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC)
                                                                                                                                 −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→
                                                                                                                             #SB5           #MC5            #MC5             #AK5                                        k5
                                  (AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC AK-MC)
                                   −
                                   −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
                                                           →
                    #SB5           #MC5      #MC5       #AK5                          k5                                                                    AKMC                                          AK
                                        AKMC                                                                                              SB                                   MC
                                                             AK                                           MulAK
                               SB                   MC                                                                                    SR
       MulAK
                ←
                →              SR                                                                                  ←
                                                                                                                   →ENC
                S ENC                                                                                              S
                                                                                                                      (+48    , +16   )                                MC-RULE(−0   , −0      )
                 (+12   , +4    )                  MC-RULE(−0   , −0   )                                                                                              XOR-RULE(−0   , −16         )            (−0    , −0    )
                                                  XOR-RULE(−0   , −4   )   (−0    , −0       )                                                 (+0   , +0   )                                                          #KMC5
                                (+0   , +0   )
                                                                                      #KMC5




                                                                                                                             #SB6                #MC6                #AK6                   #AK6                         k6
                    #SB6             #MC6         #AK6           #AK6                 k6
                                                                           AK
                               SB            MC                                                                                                                                                           AK
                                                                                                                                          SB                    MC
                                SR                                                                                                        SR
                               −−→                        ←−−
                               End                        End
                                         Match                                                                                        −−→
                                                                                                                                      End
                                                                                                                                                                               ←−−
                                                                                                                                                                               End                        T
                                                                           T                                                                                Match

                                                                                                                     Config
         Config
                                                                                                                  • (−
                                                                                                                     →    ←
                                                                                                                          −) = (48 , 32 )
                                                                                                                      ι , ι
       • (−
          →ι , ←
               −                                                                                                     −
                                                                                                                     → ←   − →← −→ ←      −− ←  −→
                ι ) = (12 , 8 )                                                                                   • (db , dr , m , dgb , dgr , dgbr ) = (20 , 4 , 16 , 0       , 12     , 0       )
          −
          → ←   − →← −→ ←      −− ←  −→                                                                              −
                                                                                                                     → ←   −− ← − −→ →← −→ ←          −− ← −→
       • (db , dr , m , dgb , dgr , dgbr ) = (5 , 1 , 4 , 0 , 3             , 0   )                               • (db −dgr , dr −dgb , m −dgb −dgr −dgbr ) = (8, 4, 4)
          −
          → ←    −− ←− −→ →← −→ ←          −− ← −
                                                →
       • (db −dgr , dr −dgb , m −dgb −dgr −dgbr ) = (2, 1, 1)

                                                                                                   Fig. 11: The MITM attack on full-state 7-round Whirlpool (2 × 2 of
Fig. 10: The states in real attacks for superposition states in Fig. 3                             4 × 4) corresponding to the small-state conﬁguration in Fig. 3




                                                                                                   46
                                                           #MC0
                                                              BL                #AK0
                                                                                   BL



                 #SB0                   #MC0
                                                                        MC                                                  MC
                                                   AKMC                                    AK
                              SB
GnD
                             SR                                   (+0   , +15   )                             #KMC−1                     k0


                                                   AKMC                                    AK
                                                                        MC                                                  MC
                          MC-RULE(−0    ,−0    )
                          XOR-RULE(−0   ,−0    )


                                                           #MC0
                                                              RD                #AK0
                                                                                   RD
                                                                                                                                  (−3    , −0    )




                 #SB1                   #MC1                                        #SB2
                                                                                                                            MC
                                                          Match
                              SB
                                                     MC
                             SR
                                                                                                              #KMC0                      k1


                             −−→
                             End          Match +9                                                                          MC




                                                                                                                                  (−0    , −0    )




                                                           #MC2
                                                              BL                #AK2
                                                                                   BL



                 #SB2                   #MC2
                                                                        MC                                                  MC
                                                   AKMC                                    AK
                              SB

                             SR                                   (+0   , +0    )                             #KMC1                      k2


                                                   AKMC                                    AK
                                                                        MC                                                  MC
                          MC-RULE(−0    ,−0    )
                        XOR-RULE(−12    ,−0    )
                                                                                                                                                     ←
                                                                                                                                                     →KSA
                                                                                                                                                     S
                                                           #MC2
                                                              RD                #AK2
                                                                                   RD                                             (+12    , +0    )
                                                                                                                                   (−0   , −0    )




                                                           #MC3
                                                              BL                #AK3
                                                                                   BL



                 #SB3                   #MC3
                                                                        MC                                                  MC
                                                   AKMC                                    AK
                              SB

                             SR                                   (+0   , +0    )                             #KMC2                      k3
      ←
      →
      S ENC
                                                   AKMC                                    AK
          (+12    , +48     )                                           MC                                                  MC
                          MC-RULE(−0    ,−0    )
                          XOR-RULE(−0   ,−0    )


                                                           #MC3
                                                              RD                #AK3
                                                                                   RD
                                                                                                                                  (−0    , −0    )




                                                           #MC4
                                                              BL                #AK4
                                                                                   BL



                 #SB4                   #MC4
                                                                        MC                                                  MC
                                                   AKMC                                    AK
                              SB

                             SR                                   (+0   , +0    )                             #KMC3                      k4


                                                   AKMC                                    AK
                                                                        MC                                                  MC
                          MC-RULE(−0    ,−24   )
                          XOR-RULE(−0   ,−0    )


                                                           #MC4
                                                              RD                #AK4
                                                                                   RD
                                                                                                                                  (−0    , −0    )




                                                           #MC5
                                                              BL                #AK5
                                                                                   BL



                 #SB5                   #MC5
                                                                        MC                                                  MC
                                                   AKMC                                    AK
                              SB

                             SR                                   (+0   , +0    )                             #KMC4                      k5


                                                   AKMC                                    AK
                                                                        MC                                                  MC
                          MC-RULE(−0    ,−0    )
                          XOR-RULE(−0   ,−0    )


                                                           #MC5
                                                              RD                #AK5
                                                                                   RD




                                               Config

                        • (−
                           →    −) = (24 , 48 ) • (−
                                ←
                            ι , ι
                                                      → ←   − →← −→ ←      −− ←  −→
                                                      db , dr , m , dgb , dgr , dgbr ) = (9     , 24   , 24    , 15   , 0   , 0     )
                           −
                           → ←   −− ← − −→ →← −→ ←        −
                                                          − ←   −
                                                                →
                        • (db −dgr , dr −dgb , m −dgb −dgr −dgbr ) = (9, 9, 9 )




       Fig. 12: An MITM attack on 6-round Whirlpool with asymmetric pattern
                                                                        47
                                                  #MC0
                                                     BL        #AK0
                                                                  BL


                  #SB0         #MC0                       MC                                   MC
                                         AKMC                           AK
                         SB
  BiDir                                             (+0   , +0    )                #KMC−1            k0
                         SR              AKMC                           AK
                                                          MC                                   MC

                      MC-RULE(−1   ,−0   )
                     XOR-RULE(−0   ,−3   )        #MC0
                                                     RD        #AK0
                                                                  RD
                                                                                               (−0   , −0       )


                                                  #MC1
                                                     BL        #AK1
                                                                  BL


                  #SB1         #MC1                       MC                                   MC
                                         AKMC                           AK
                         SB

                         SR
                                                    (+0   , +0    )                 #KMC0            k1
                                         AKMC                           AK
                                                          MC                                   MC

                      MC-RULE(−0   ,−0   )                                                                  ←
                                                                                                            →KSA
                                                                                                            S
                     XOR-RULE(−0   ,−0   )        #MC1
                                                     RD        #AK1
                                                                  RD                           (+9   , +4       )
                                                                                               (−0   , −0       )


                                                  #MC2
                                                     BL        #AK2
                                                                  BL


                  #SB2         #MC2                       MC                                   MC
                                         AKMC                           AK
                         SB
  BiDir                                             (+0   , +0    )                 #KMC1            k2
          ←
          →ENC           SR              AKMC
          S                                                             AK
                                                          MC                                   MC
            (+9    , +4    )
                      MC-RULE(−6   ,−0   )
                     XOR-RULE(−0   ,−0   )        #MC2
                                                     RD        #AK2
                                                                  RD
                                                                                               (−6   , −0       )


                                                  #MC3
                                                     BL        #AK3
                                                                  BL


                  #SB3         #MC3                       MC                                   MC
                                         AKMC                           AK
                         SB

                         SR
                                                    (+0   , +0    )                 #KMC2            k3
                                         AKMC                           AK
                                                          MC                                   MC

                      MC-RULE(−0   ,−0   )
                     XOR-RULE(−0   ,−0   )        #MC3
                                                     RD        #AK3
                                                                  RD
                                                                                               (−0   , −0       )


                                                                  T


                  #SB4         #MC4                                                            MC
                         SB
 MulAK                                       MC   Match
                                                                 #SB0               #KMC3            k4
                         SR
                         −−→                                                                   MC
                         End   Match +5




   Config
                              −
                              → ←  − →← −→ ←      −− ←  −→
• (−
   →    ←
        −) = (18
    ι , ι           , 8 ) • (db , dr , m , dgb , dgr , dgbr ) = (5           , 5   , 5   , 0   , 0   , 0    )
   −
   → ←   −− ← − −→ →← −→ ←       −− ←  −
                                       →
• (db −dgr , dr −dgb , m −dgb −dgr −dgbr ) = (5, 5, 5 )


                  This implies an attack on the full version (8 × 8) with conﬁguration
                     → ←− ←
                     −          − −→ →← −→ ←− ←−→
                   ((db − dgr , dr − dgb , m −dgb − dgr − dgbr ) = (20, 20, 20))

Fig. 13: An example of using (2 × 2 of 4 × 4) to search the MITM attack on 5-round
Whirlpool




                                                          48
                   #SB0                 #MC0                          #AC0                                  #SB0                  #MC0                         #AC0


                                 SB                        MC                                                            SB                         MC
BiDir
                                 SR                                                                                      SR


                                            −−→                            ←−−
                                            End        Match               End                                                               (−0    ,−0    ) (+0    ,+0        )


                   #SB1                 #MC1                          #AC1                                  #SB1                  #MC1                         #AC1


                                 SB                        MC                                                            SB                         MC

                                 SR                                                                                      SR



                                                    (−0    ,−0    ) (+0   ,+0    )                                                          (−25     ,−0   )(+0     ,+0        )


                   #SB2                 #MC2                          #AC2                                  #SB2                  #MC2                         #AC2


                                 SB                        MC                                                            SB                         MC

                                 SR                                                                                      SR

         ←
         →ENC                                                                                       ←
                                                                                                    →ENC
         S                                                                                          S
                (+25   ,+9   )        (+0    ,+0   ) (−0   ,−0    )                                    (+48   ,+16   )         (+0    ,+0   ) (−0   ,−6    )


                   #SB3                 #MC3                          #AC3                                  #SB3                  #MC3                         #AC3


                                 SB                        MC                                                            SB                         MC
BiDir                                                                                      BiDir
                                 SR                                                                                      SR



                                      (+0    ,+0   )(−16    ,−0   )                                                            (+0    ,+0   )(−14    ,−1   )


                   #SB4                 #MC4                          #AC4                                  #SB4                  #MC4                         #AC4


                                                                                     AT                                                                                            AT
                                 SB                        MC                                                            SB                         MC
                                                                                           BiDir
                                 SR                                                   T                                  SR                                                         T

                                                                                                                                     −−→                                 ←−−
                                      (+0    ,+0   ) (−0   ,−0    )                                                                  End        Match                    End

        Config                                                                                     Config
    • (−
       →ι , ←
            −ι ) = (25  , 9   )                                                                • (−
                                                                                                  →ι , ←
                                                                                                       −ι ) = (48  , 16    )
       −
       → ←   − →← −→ ←      −− ←  −→                                                              −
                                                                                                  → ←   − →← −→ ←      −− ←  −→
    • (db , dr , m , dgb , dgr , dgbr ) = (9  , 9 , 16 , 0  , 0           , 0   )              • (db , dr , m , dgb , dgr , dgbr ) = (9  , 9 , 9 , 0  , 0          , 0    )
       −
       → ←    −− ←− −→ →← −→ ←          −
                                        − ←  −
                                             →                                                    −
                                                                                                  → ←    −− ←− −→ →← −→ ←          −
                                                                                                                                   − ←  −
                                                                                                                                        →
    • (db −dgr , dr −dgb , m −dgb −dgr −dgbr ) = (9, 9, 16)                                    • (db −dgr , dr −dgb , m −dgb −dgr −dgbr ) = (9, 9, 9)



Fig. 14: An example of the MITM attack on the OT of the 5-round Fig. 15: An example of the MITM attack on P (H ′ ) ⊕ H ′ in the CF
Grøstl-256                                                      of the 5-round Grøstl-256 (without guessing)




                                                                                          49
                         #SB0                             #MC0                                       #AC0
                                                                                                                                               #SB0                             #MC0                                       #AC0

                                          SB                                   MC
BiDir                                                                                                                                                           SB                                   MC
                                          SR
                                                                                                                                                                SR

                                                             −−→                                             ←−−
                                                             End              Match                          End
                                                                                                                                                                                              (−0    , −0        )   (+0    , +0    )
                         #SB1                             #MC1                                       #AC1
                                                                                                                                               #SB1                             #MC1                                       #AC1

                                          SB                                   MC
                                                                                                                                                                SB                                   MC
                                          SR
                                                                                                                                                                SR


                                                                        (−5    , −0        )   (+0    , +0    )
                                                                                                                                                                                              (−9    , −0        )   (+0    , +0    )

                         #SB2                             #MC2                                       #AC2
                                                                                                                                               #SB2                             #MC2                                       #AC2


                                          SB                                   MC
BiDir                                                                                                                                                           SB                                   MC
                                          SR
                                                                                                                                                                SR


                                                                        (−3    , −14       )   (+0    , +0    )
                                                                                                                                                                                              (−27    , −0       )   (+0    , +0    )

                         #SB3                             #MC3                                       #AC3
                                                                                                                                               #SB3                             #MC3                                       #AC3


                                          SB                                   MC
                                                                                                                                                                SB                                   MC
BiDir
                                          SR
                                                                                                                                                                SR
        ←
        →ENC
        S                                                                                                                    ←
                                                                                                                             →
                                                                                                                             S ENC
                  (+75    , +26   )                    (+0   , +0   )   (−23    , −0       )
                                                                                                                                        (+49    , +33   )                    (+0   , +0   )   (−0    , −12       )

                         #SB4                             #MC4                                       #AC4
                                                                                                                                               #SB4                             #MC4                                       #AC4


                                          SB                                   MC
                                                                                                                                                                SB                                   MC
BiDir
                                          SR
                                                                                                                                                                SR


                                                       (+0   , +0   )   (−25    , −0       )                                                                                 (+0   , +0   )   (−0    , −8        )

                         #SB5                             #MC5                                       #AC5                                      #SB5                             #MC5                                       #AC5


                                          SB                                   MC                                                                               SB                                   MC
                                          SR                                                                                                                    SR



                                                       (+0   , +0   )   (−0    , −0        )                                                                                 (+0   , +0   )   (−0    , −0        )

                         #SB6                             #MC6                                       #AC6                                      #SB6                             #MC6                                       #AC6


                                                                                                                   AT                                                                                                                    AT
                                          SB                                   MC                                                                               SB                                   MC
GnD
                                          SR                                                                        T                                           SR                                                                        T

                                                                                                                                                                                   −−→                                             ←−−
                                                       (+0   , +7   )   (−0    , −0        )                                                                                       End              Match                          End

               Config                                                                                                                Config
               • (−
                  →    ←
                       −) = (75
                   ι , ι           , 26    )                                                                                         • (−
                                                                                                                                        →    ←
                                                                                                                                             −) = (49
                                                                                                                                         ι , ι           , 33    )
                  −
                  → ←   − →← −→ ←      −− ←  −→                                                                                         −
                                                                                                                                        → ←   − →← −→ ←      −− ←  −→
               • (db , dr , m , dgb , dgr , dgbr ) = (19  , 12 , 19 , 0  , 7   , 0     )                                             • (db , dr , m , dgb , dgr , dgbr ) = (13  , 13 , 13 , 0  , 0   , 0     )
                  −
                  → ←   −− ← − −→ →← −→ ←          −
                                                   − ←  −→                                                                              −
                                                                                                                                        → ←   −− ← − −→ →← −→ ←          −
                                                                                                                                                                         − ←  −→
               • (db −dgr , dr −dgb , m −dgb −dgr −dgbr ) = (12, 12, 12)                                                             • (db −dgr , dr −dgb , m −dgb −dgr −dgbr ) = (13, 13, 13)




Fig. 16: An example of the MITM attack on the OT of the 7-round Fig. 17: An example of the MITM attack on P (H ′ ) ⊕ H ′ in the CF
Grøstl-512                                                      of the 7-round Grøstl-512 (without guessing)




                                                                                                                        50
                                                                                               k0


               #SB0           #MC0                  MC
                                                                   AK
                        SB
BiDir                                       (−0     , −2    )(−0   , −0    )
                        SR
                                                                   AK
                                                    MC




                                                                                               k1


               #SB1           #MC1                  MC
                                                                   AK                                      SupP                      col5≪1
                        SB
BiDir                                       (−0     , −4    )(−0   , −0    )
                        SR
                                                                   AK
                                                                                                              k−1               k0
                                                    MC

                                                                                                                    S   <<   (−0 , − 2 )




                                                                                               k2


               #SB2           #MC2                  MC
                                                                   AK
                        SB
BiDir                                       (−0     , −0    )(−0   , −8    )                               SupP                      col5≪1
                        SR
                                                                   AK
                                                    MC
                                                                                                              k0                k1

                                                                                                                    S   <<   (−0 , − 0 )



                                                                                               k3


               #SB3           #MC3                  MC
                                                                   AK
                        SB
                                            (−0     , −0    )(−0   , −0    )
        ←
        →ENC            SR
        S                                                          AK                                      SupP
                                                    MC                                                                               col5≪1
         (+0    , +16    )
                                                                                                              k2                k3

                                                                                                                    S   <<   (−0 , − 0 )

                                                                                               k4


               #SB4           #MC4                  MC
                                                                   AK
                        SB
                                            (−0     , −2    )(−0   , −0    )
                        SR
                                                                   AK
                                                    MC
                                                                                                           SupP                      col5≪1

                                                                                                              k3                k4
                                                                                                                              ←
                                                                                                                              →KSA
                                                                                                                              S
                                                                                                                    S   <<   (+2 , + 22 )
                                                                                               k5


               #SB5           #MC5                  MC
                                                                   AK
                        SB
                                            (−0     , −0    (−0
                                                            )      , −11   )
                        SR
                                                                   AK
                                                    MC


                                                                                                           SupP                      col5≪1

                                                                                                              k5                k6

                                                                                               k6
                                                                                                                    S   <<   (−0 , − 2 )

               #SB6           #MC6                  MC
                                                                   AK
                        SB
                                            (−0     , −0    )(−0   , −3    )
                        SR
                                                                   AK
                                                    MC




                                                                                                           SupP                      col5≪1


                                                                                               k7
                                                                                                              k6                k7

                                                                                                                    S   <<   (−0 , − 2 )
               #SB7           #MC7                  MC
                                                                   AK
                        SB
                                            (−0     , −0    )(−0   , −0    )
                        SR
                                                                   AK
                                                    MC




                                                                                                           SupP
                                                            T                                  k̃8   k−1
                                                                                                              k8                k9
               #SB8           #MC8
                                                                                                                             (−0 , − 0 )
                        SB
BiDir                                       Match
                                                           #SB0
                        SR
                                                                                                              (b) Key Schedule
                        −−→
                        End   Match +2




                                                       −
                                                       → ←   − →←
        Config:   • (−
                     →
                     ι , ←
                         −
                         ι ) = (2        , 38   )   • (db , dr , m ) = (2      , 2   , 2   )


                                           (a) Encryption States                           51

                              Fig. 18: A conﬁguration of MITM attack against 9-Round AES-192 hashing mode
                                                                                               k0


               #SB0           #MC0                  MC
                                                                   AK
                        SB
BiDir                                       (−0     , −1    )(−0   , −0    )
                        SR
                                                                   AK                                                    SupP
                                                    MC                                                                                              col3≪1

                                                                                                                            k−1

                                                                                                                                  S   <<   (−0 , − 0 )

                                                                                               k1


               #SB1           #MC1                  MC
                                                                   AK
                        SB
BiDir                                       (−0     , −5    )(−0   , −0    )                                             SupP
                        SR                                                                                                                          col3≪1
                                                                   AK
                                                    MC
                                                                                                                            k0

                                                                                                                                  S   <<   (−0 , − 0 )



                                                                                               k2


               #SB2           #MC2                  MC
                                                                   AK
                        SB                                                                                               SupP                       col3≪1
BiDir                                       (−0     , −0    )(−0   , −4    )
                        SR
                                                                   AK
                                                    MC                                                                      k1

                                                                                                                                  S   <<   (−0 , − 0 )




                                                                                               k3


               #SB3           #MC3                                                                                       SupP
                                                    MC                                                                                              col3≪1
                                                                   AK
                        SB
                                            (−0     , −0    )(−0   , −1    )                                                k2
        ←
        →ENC            SR
        S                                                          AK
                                                    MC                                                            #T K
         (+0    , +16    )                                                                                                        S   <<   (−0 , − 0 )
                                                                                                     (+1   , +7    )




                                                                                               k4
                                                                                                                         SupP                       col3≪1
               #SB4           #MC4                  MC
                                                                   AK
                        SB                                                                                                  k3
                                            (−0     , −0    )(−0   , −4    )                                                                ←
                                                                                                                                            →
                                                                                                                                            S KSA
                        SR
                                                                   AK                                                                      (+0 , + 16 )
                                                    MC                                                                            S   <<




                                                                                               k5                        SupP                       col3≪1

               #SB5           #MC5                  MC                                                                      k4
                                                                   AK
                        SB
                                            (−0     , −1    (−0
                                                            )      , −15   )                                                      S   <<   (−0 , − 0 )
                        SR
                                                                   AK
                                                    MC




                                                                                                                         SupP                       col3≪1
                                                                                               k6

                                                                                                                            k5
               #SB6           #MC6                  MC
                                                                   AK                                                                      (−0 , − 1 )
                        SB                                                                                                        S   <<

                                            (−0     , −0    )(−0   , −0    )
                        SR
                                                                   AK
                                                    MC




                                                                                                                         SupP                       col3≪1

                                                                                               k7                           k6

               #SB7           #MC7                  MC
                                                                                                                                  S   <<   (−0 , − 4 )
                                                                   AK
                        SB
                                            (−0     , −0    )(−0   , −0    )
                        SR
                                                                   AK
                                                    MC



                                                                                                                         SupP                       col3≪1

                                                                                                                            k7
                                                            T                                  k̃8         k−1

                                                                                                                                  S   <<   (−0 , − 2 )
               #SB8           #MC8
                        SB
BiDir                                       Match
                                                           #SB0
                        SR
                        −−→
                        End   Match +1
                                                                                                                         SupP

                                                                                                                            k8

                                                                                                                                           (−0 , − 0 )
                                                       −
                                                       → ←   − →←
        Config:   • (−
                     →
                     ι , ←
                         −
                         ι ) = (1        , 39   )   • (db , dr , m ) = (1      , 1   , 1   )                              (b) Key Schedule
                                           (a) Encryption States                           52
 Subkeys are already XORed with the tweak. Besides, the displayed subkey k˜8 is already XORed with the whitening key k−1 .
                               Fig. 19: A conﬁguration of MITM attack on 9-Round Kiasu-BC hashing mode
                                       E.2     Visualization of conﬁgurations facilitated to converting to
                                               collision attacks and key-recovery attacks




                                                                                                      #SB0                           #MC0                                        #AC0


                                                                                                                     SB                                      MC

                                                                                                                     SR



                                                                                                                                                       (−0     , −0    )   (+0    , +0    )


                                                                                                      #SB1                           #MC1                                        #AC1

                   #SB0                  #MC0                     #AC0
                                                                                                                     SB                                      MC

                                  SB                   MC                                                            SR
BiDir
                                  SR
                                                                                                                                                       (−0     , −0    )   (+0    , +0    )


                                                 (−7   , −1   )                                       #SB2                           #MC2                                        #AC2


                   #SB1                  #MC1                     #AC1                                               SB                                      MC

                                                                                                                     SR

                                  SB                   MC

                                  SR                                                                                                               (−14         , −0   )   (+0    , +0    )


                                                                                                      #SB3                           #MC3                                        #AC3

                                                 (−0   , −0   )
                                                                                                                     SB                                      MC
                   #SB2                  #MC2                     #AC2                                               SR


                                  SB                   MC                                                                                          (−34         , −0   )   (+0    , +0    )
                                  SR
                                                                                                      #SB4                           #MC4                                        #AC4
         ←
         →ENC
         S
                (+34   , +4   )                  (−0   , −0   )                                                      SB                                      MC

                                                                                                                     SR
                   #SB3                  #MC3                     #AC3
                                                                                   ←
                                                                                   →ENC
                                                                                   S
                                                                                               (+51    , +27   )                  (+0   , +0   )   (−0         , −16   )
                                  SB                   MC
                                                                                                      #SB5                           #MC5                                        #AC5
                                  SR

                                                                                                                     SB                                      MC
                                                (−24   , −0   )                                                      SR

                   #SB4                  #MC4                     #AC4
                                                                                                                                  (+0   , +0   )       (−0     , −8    )

                                  SB                   MC                                             #SB6                           #MC6                                        #AC6

                                  SR
                                                                                                                     SB                                      MC

                                                                                                                     SR
                                                 (−0   , −0   )


                   #SB5                  #MC5                     #AC5                                                            (+0   , +0   )       (−0     , −0    )


                                                                                                      #SB7                           #MC7                                        #AC7
                                                                              AT
                                  SB                   MC
BiDir                                                                                                                                                                                          AT
                                  SR                                           T                                     SB                                      MC

                                                                                                                     SR                                                                         T
                                         −−→                            ←−−
                                         End       Match                End
                                                                                                                                        −−→                                              ←−−
                                                                                                                                        End              Match                           End
        Config
                                                                                          Config
    • (−
       →    ←
            −) = (34
        ι , ι           , 4   )
       −
       → ←   − →← −→ ←      −− ←  −→                                                      • (−
                                                                                             →    ←
                                                                                                  −) = (51
                                                                                              ι , ι           , 27    )
    • (db , dr , m , dgb , dgr , dgbr ) = (3  , 3 , 3 , 0  , 0    , 0    )                   −
                                                                                             → ←   − →← −→ ←      −− ←  −→
                                                                                          • (db , dr , m , dgb , dgr , dgbr ) = (3  , 3 , 3 , 0  , 0     , 0     )
       −
       → ←   −− ← − −→ →← −→ ←          −
                                        − ←  −
                                             →                                               −
                                                                                             → ←   −− ← − −→ →← −→ ←          −
                                                                                                                              − ←  −
                                                                                                                                   →
    • (db −dgr , dr −dgb , m −dgb −dgr −dgbr ) = (3, 3, 3)                                • (db −dgr , dr −dgb , m −dgb −dgr −dgbr ) = (3, 3, 3)




Fig. 20: An example of conﬁguration for collision attack on Fig. 21: An example of conﬁguration for collision attack on the OT of 8-round
the OT of 6-round Grøstl-256                                Grøstl-512


                                                                                          53
                                                                                               k0                                  col3≪1


                #SB0           #MC0
                                                                                                           k−1
                                                     MC
                                                                    AK
                         SB
 BiDir                                       (−0     , −2    )(−0   , −0   )                                     S   <<   (−0 , − 0 )
                         SR
                                                                    AK
                                                     MC




                                                                                               k1
                                                                                                                                   col3≪1

                #SB1           #MC1                  MC                                                    k0
                                                                    AK                                                     ←
                                                                                                                           →
                         SB                                                                                                S KSA
 BiDir                                       (−0     , −4    )(−0   , −0   )
                                                                                                                          (+0 , + 14 )
                         SR                                                                                      S   <<
                                                                    AK
                                                     MC




                                                                                               k2
                                                                                                                                   col3≪1

                #SB2           #MC2                  MC
                                                                    AK
                                                                                                           k1
                         SB
 BiDir                                       (−0     , −0    )(−0   , −6   )
                         SR
                                                                    AK                                           S   <<   (−0 , − 0 )
                                                     MC




                                                                                               k3
                                                                                                                                   col3≪1
                #SB3           #MC3                  MC
                         SB
                                                                    AK                                     k2
                                             (−0     , −1    )(−0   , −4   )
         ←
         →ENC            SR
         S
                                                     MC
                                                                    AK                                           S   <<   (−0 , − 3 )
          (+2    , +14    )




                                                                                               k4
                                                                                                                                   col3≪1
                #SB4           #MC4                  MC
                                                                    AK                                     k3
                         SB
                                             (−0     , −0    )(−0   , −4   )
                         SR
                                                                    AK                                                    (−0 , − 0 )
                                                     MC                                                          S   <<




                                                                                               k5

                                                                                                                                   col3≪1
                #SB5           #MC5                  MC
                                                                    AK
                         SB                                                                                k4
                                             (−0     , −0    )(−0   , −0   )
                         SR
                                                                    AK
                                                     MC                                                          S   <<   (−0 , − 0 )




                                                             T                                 k̃6   k−1


                                                                                                                                   col3≪1
                #SB6           #MC6
                         SB
BiDir                                        Match                                                         k5
                         SR                                 #SB0

                         −−→                                                                                              (−0 , − 2 )
                         End   Match +2                                                                          S   <<




                                                        −
                                                        → ←   − →←
         Config:   • (−
                      →   ←
                          −) = (2
                      ι , ι               , 28   )   • (db , dr , m ) = (2     , 2   , 2   )


                                             (a) Encryption States                                         k6

                                                                                                                          (−0 , − 0 )

                                                                                                           (b) Key Schedule
⋆ In this and in other attack conﬁgurations on AES-hashing, the displayed last subkey is already XORed with the whitening key k−1 . Besides, the key-schedule
                                                                                        ←→KSA
is unrolled such that variables in each subkey are directly related to the variables in S     . Therefore, an XOR of two Red (or Blue) cells can turn to Gray
according to the algebraic normal form while consuming no degrees of freedom.
                                                                                           54
⋆ For converting this attack conﬁguration to a valid collision attack, it is necessary to pre-compute values of neutral bytes (in Red) for many ﬁxed bytes (in
Gray) at once with a total complexity of no more than 256 . For this, aided by the Automatic-Tool in [8], we found a guess-and-determine meet-in-the-middle
procedure that generates 256 values of neutral bytes for 240 values of Gray bytes (i.e., the ﬁve bytes #MC1Red [2, 5, 8, 15] and #SB5Red [0]) with a complexity of
256 . The system of equations and the automatically obtained procedure can be found via https://github.com/MITM-AES-like.


                                 Fig. 22: A conﬁguration of MITM attack against 7-Round AES-128 hashing mode
                                 (facilitated to converting to a collision attack)
                           Round 0                SR           MC                                      Round 13                 SR          MC
               0 1 2 3                                                                    10 8 1215
               4 5 6 7               SB                                                   141113 9             SB
               8 9 1011                                                    ←
                                                                           →KSA            4 2 6 1
                                                                           S
              12131415                            SR           MC                          5 7 3 0                              SR          MC
                                                                           +6
                            ←→ENC
                             S

       ←
       →KSA
                            +15                                -4
       S
       +9


                           Round 1                SR           MC                                      Round 14                 SR          MC
               9 15 8 13                                                                   2 0 4 7
              10141211               SB                                                    6 3 5 1             SB
SupP
               0 1 2 3                                                                    10 8 1215
               4 5 6 7                            SR           MC                         141113 9                              SR          MC

                                                               -5



                           Round 2                SR           MC                                      Round 15                 SR          MC
               1 7 0 5                                                                     8 9 1011
               2 6 4 3               SB                                                   12131415             SB
               9 15 8 13                                                                   2 0 4 7
              10141211                            SR           MC                          6 3 5 1                              SR          MC

                                              -2               -2



                           Round 3                SR           MC                                      Round 16                 SR          MC
              1511 9 14                                                                    0 1 2 3
               8 121013              SB                                                    4 5 6 7             SB
               1 7 0 5                                                                     8 9 1011
               2 6 4 3                            SR           MC                         12131415                              SR          MC

                                              -1



                           Round 4                SR           MC                                      Round 17                 SR          MC
               7 3 1 6                                                                     9 15 8 13
               0 4 2 5               SB                                                   10141211             SB
              1511 9 14                                                                    0 1 2 3
               8 121013                           SR           MC                          4 5 6 7                              SR          MC

                                              -2



                           Round 5                SR           MC                                      Round 18                 SR          MC
              11131512                                                                     1 7 0 5
               9 10 8 14             SB                                                    2 6 4 3             SB
               7 3 1 6                                                                     9 15 8 13
               0 4 2 5                            SR           MC                         10141211                              SR          MC

                                              -1



                           Round 6                SR           MC                                      Round 19                 SR          MC
               3 5 7 4                                                                    1511 9 14
                                                                                                                               -2
               1 2 0 6               SB                                                    8 121013            SB
              11131512                                                                     1 7 0 5
               9 10 8 14                          SR           MC                          2 6 4 3                              SR          MC

                                              -2



                           Round 7                SR           MC                                      Round 20                 SR          MC
              13141110                                                                     7 3 1 6
              15 8 9 12              SB                                                    0 4 2 5             SB
               3 5 7 4                                                                    1511 9 14
               1 2 0 6                            SR           MC                          8 121013                             SR          MC

                                              -1



                           Round 8                SR           MC                                      Round 21                 SR          MC
               5 6 3 2                                                                    11131512
                                                                                                                               -2
               7 0 1 4               SB                                                    9 10 8 14           SB
              13141110                                                                     7 3 1 6
              15 8 9 12                           SR           MC                          0 4 2 5                              SR          MC

                                              -2



                           Round 9                SR           MC                                      Round 22                 SR          MC
              141213 8                                                                     3 5 7 4
              11 9 1510              SB                                                    1 2 0 6             SB
               5 6 3 2                                                                    11131512
               7 0 1 4                            SR           MC                          9 10 8 14                            SR          MC




                           Round 10               SR           MC
               6 4 5 0
               3 1 7 2               SB
              141213 8
              11 9 1510                           SR           MC


                                                                                       Config
                                                                                   • (−
                                                                                      →, ι
                                                                                        ι   ←
                                                                                            −) = (6 , 24 )
                                                  SR           MC
                           Round 11                                                   −
                                                                                      → ←   − →← −→ ←− ←→
              121014 9
                                                                                   • ( db , dr , m , dgb , dgr , dgbr ) = (2 , 2 , 1 , 0 , 0 , 0 )
                                     SB                                               −
                                                                                      → ←− ←     − −→ →← −→ ←− ←→
              131511 8                                                             • ( db −dgr , dr −dgb , m −dgb −dgr −dgbr ) = (2, 2, 1 )
               6 4 5 0
               3 1 7 2                            SR           MC




                           Round12                           Match                55
               4 2 6 1
               5 7 3 0               SB       SR              MC
              121014 9
              131511 8
                                                       −−→           ←−−
                                                       End           End
                                          SR,MC




                                      Fig. 23: A key-recovery attack on 23-round SKINNY-n-3n, optimized for time com-
                                      plexity
                    Round 0                SR           MC                                          Round 13                  SR          MC
        0 1 2 3                                                                        10 8 1215
        4 5 6 7               SB                                                       141113 9              SB
        8 9 1011                                                    ←
                                                                    →                   4 2 6 1
                                                                    S KSA
        12131415                           SR           MC                              5 7 3 0                               SR          MC
                                                                    +3
                      ←
                      →ENC
                      S

←
→
                      +7                                -3
S KSA
+6


                    Round 1                SR           MC                                          Round 14                  SR          MC
        9 15 8 13                                                                       2 0 4 7
        10141211              SB                                                        6 3 5 1              SB
        0 1 2 3                                                                        10 8 1215
        4 5 6 7                            SR           MC                             141113 9                               SR          MC

                                       -1               -2



                    Round 2                SR           MC                                          Round 15                  SR          MC
        1 7 0 5                                                                         8 9 1011
        2 6 4 3               SB                                                       12131415              SB
        9 15 8 13                                                                       2 0 4 7
        10141211                           SR           MC                              6 3 5 1                               SR          MC




                    Round 3                SR           MC                                          Round 16                  SR          MC
        1511 9 14                                                                       0 1 2 3
        8 121013              SB                                                        4 5 6 7              SB
        1 7 0 5                                                                         8 9 1011
        2 6 4 3                            SR           MC                             12131415                               SR          MC

                                       -2



                    Round 4                SR           MC                                          Round 17                  SR          MC
        7 3 1 6                                                                         9 15 8 13
        0 4 2 5               SB                                                       10141211              SB
        1511 9 14                                                                       0 1 2 3
        8 121013                           SR           MC                              4 5 6 7                               SR          MC




                    Round 5                SR           MC                                          Round 18                  SR          MC
        11131512                                                                        1 7 0 5
        9 10 8 14             SB                                                        2 6 4 3              SB
        7 3 1 6                                                                         9 15 8 13
        0 4 2 5                            SR           MC                             10141211                               SR          MC

                                       -2



                    Round 6                SR           MC                                          Round 19                  SR          MC
        3 5 7 4                                                                        1511 9 14
                                                                                                                            -1
        1 2 0 6               SB                                                        8 121013             SB
        11131512                                                                        1 7 0 5
        9 10 8 14                          SR           MC                              2 6 4 3                               SR          MC




                    Round 7                SR           MC                                          Round 20                  SR          MC
        13141110                                                                        7 3 1 6
        15 8 9 12             SB                                                        0 4 2 5              SB
        3 5 7 4                                                                        1511 9 14
        1 2 0 6                            SR           MC                              8 121013                              SR          MC

                                       -2



                    Round 8                SR           MC                                          Round 21                  SR          MC
        5 6 3 2                                                                        11131512
                                                                                                                            -1
        7 0 1 4               SB                                                        9 10 8 14            SB
        13141110                                                                        7 3 1 6
        15 8 9 12                          SR           MC                              0 4 2 5                               SR          MC




                    Round 9                SR           MC                                          Round 22                  SR          MC
        141213 8                                                                        3 5 7 4
        11 9 1510             SB                                                        1 2 0 6              SB
        5 6 3 2                                                                        11131512
        7 0 1 4                            SR           MC                              9 10 8 14                             SR          MC




                    Round 10               SR           MC
        6 4 5 0
        3 1 7 2               SB
        141213 8
        11 9 1510                          SR           MC


                                                                                 Config
                                                                                 • (−
                                                                                    → ι,← −ι ) = (3 , 13 )
                                           SR           MC
                    Round 11                                                        −
                                                                                    → ←   − →← −→ ←− ←→
        121014 9
                                                                                 • ( db , dr , m , dgb , dgr , dgbr ) = (1 , 1 , 1 , 0 , 0 , 0 )
                              SB                                                    −
                                                                                    → ←− ←      − −→ →← −→ ←− ←→
        131511 8                                                                 • ( db −dgr , dr −dgb , m −dgb −dgr −dgbr ) = (1, 1, 1 )
        6 4 5 0
        3 1 7 2                            SR           MC




                                                      Match
        4 2 6 1
                    Round12                                                 56
        5 7 3 0               SB       SR              MC
        121014 9
        131511 8
                                                −−→           ←−−
                                                End           End
                                   SR,MC




                             Fig. 24: A key-recovery attack on 23-round SKINNY-n-3n, optimized for data com-
                             plexity
                                                                                               k0


                #SB0          #MC0                                                                         SupP
                                                    MC
                                                                   AK                                                                col3≪1
                        SB
 BiDir                                      (−0     , −1    )(−0   , −0   )
                                                                                                              k−1
                        SR
                                                                   AK
                                                    MC
                                                                                                                    S   <<   (−0 , − 0 )




                                                                                               k1


                #SB1          #MC1
                                                                                                           SupP                      col3≪1
                                                    MC
                                                                   AK
                        SB
 BiDir                                      (−0     , −4    )(−0   , −0   )                                   k0
                        SR
                                                                   AK
                                                    MC
                                                                                                                    S   <<   (−0 , − 0 )




                                                                                               k2

                                                                                                           SupP                      col3≪1
                #SB2          #MC2                  MC
                                                                   AK
                        SB
 BiDir                                      (−6     , −0    )(−2   , −0   )
                                                                                                              k1
         ←
         →ENC           SR
         S                                                         AK
                                                    MC                                                                       (−0 , − 1 )
                                                                                                                    S   <<
          (+8    , +8    )




                                                                                               k3
                                                                                                           SupP                      col3≪1
                #SB3          #MC3                  MC
                                                                   AK
                        SB                                                                                    k2
                                            (−0     , −0    )(−0   , −2   )
                        SR
                                                                   AK                                                        (−0 , − 0 )
                                                    MC                                                              S   <<




                                                                                               k4
                                                                                                           SupP                      col3≪1
                #SB4          #MC4                  MC
                        SB
                                                                   AK                                         k3
                                            (−0     , −1    )(−0   , −7   )
                        SR                                                                                                   (−0 , − 0 )
                                                                   AK                                               S   <<
                                                    MC




                                                                                               k5
                                                                                                           SupP                      col3≪1

                #SB5          #MC5                  MC                                                        k4
                                                                   AK                                                         ←
                                                                                                                              →KSA
                        SB                                                                                                    S
                                            (−0     , −1    )(−0   , −3   )
                        SR                                                                                          S   <<   (+1 , + 15 )
                                                                   AK
                                                    MC




                                                                                               k6          SupP                      col3≪1


                #SB6          #MC6                                                                            k5
                                                    MC
                                                                   AK
                        SB
                                            (−0     , −0    )(−0   , −0   )                                         S   <<   (−0 , − 1 )
                        SR
                                                                   AK
                                                    MC




                                                                                                     k−1
                                                                                                           SupP                      col3≪1
                                                            T                                  k̃7

                                                                                                              k6
                #SB7          #MC7
                        SB
 BiDir                                      Match                                                                   S   <<   (−0 , − 1 )
                        SR                                 #SB0

                        −−→
                        End   Match +1




                                                                                                           SupP

                                                       −
                                                       → ←   − →←                                             k7
         Config:   • (−
                      →
                      ι , ←
                          −
                          ι ) = (9       , 23   )   • (db , dr , m ) = (1     , 1    , 1   )


                                            (a) Encryption States
                                                                                57                                           (−0 , − 0 )

                                                                                                             (b) Key Schedule
For converting this attack conﬁguration to a valid collision attack, the attacker should be able to generate each value of neutral bytes with (amortized)
computational complexity O(1). It is necessary to pre-compute values of neutral bytes (in Red) for many ﬁxed bytes (in Gray) at once with a total
complexity of no more than 260 . However, we have not found such a procedure using the same method as done for the attack on 7-round AES-128.
The same problem stays open for converting attack conﬁgurations in Fig. 18, 26, and 19 to valid collision attacks.


                        Fig. 25: A conﬁguration of MITM attack against 8-Round AES-128 hashing mode
                        (facilitated to converting to a collision attack)
                                                                                           k0


                #SB0          #MC0                 MC
                                                                  AK
                        SB
                                           (−1     , −0    )(−0   , −0    )
                        SR
                                                                  AK
                                                   MC




                                                                                           k1


                #SB1          #MC1                 MC
                                                                  AK
                        SB
                                           (−4     , −0    )(−0   , −0    )
                        SR
                                                                  AK
                                                   MC




                                                                                                       SupP                             col7≪1
                                                                                           k2

                                                                                                          k−1                k0
                #SB2          #MC2                 MC
                                                                  AK
                        SB                                                                                                   (−0 , − 0 )
                                                                                                                    S   <<
                                           (−0     , −0    )(−7   , −0    )
                        SR
                                                                  AK
                                                   MC
                                                                                                                S




                                                                                           k3


                #SB3          #MC3                                                                     SupP
                                                   MC                                                                                   col7≪1   col3
                                                                  AK
                        SB
                                           (−1     , −0    )(−0   , −0    )
                        SR                                                                                k1                 k2
                                                                  AK
                                                   MC
                                                                                                                    S   <<   (−0 , − 0 )



                                                                                                                S




                                                                                           k4


                #SB4          #MC4                 MC
                                                                  AK
                        SB
BiDir                                      (−1     , −0    )(−0   , −0    )
        ←
        →               SR
        S ENC                                                     AK                                   SupP
                                                   MC                                                                                   col7≪1   col3
         (+16    , +0    )
                                                                                                          k3                 k4
                                                                                                                              ←
                                                                                                                              →KSA
                                                                                                                              S
                                                                                                                    S   <<   (+26 , + 1 )


                                                                                           k5
                                                                                                                S



                #SB5          #MC5                 MC
                                                                  AK
                        SB
BiDir                                      (−0     , −0    )(−4   , −0    )
                        SR
                                                                  AK
                                                   MC


                                                                                                       SupP                             col7≪1   col3

                                                                                                          k5                 k6
                                                                                           k6
                                                                                                                    S   <<   (−2 , − 0 )

                #SB6          #MC6                 MC
                                                                  AK
                        SB                                                                                      S
BiDir                                      (−1     , −0    (−15
                                                           )       , −0   )
                        SR
                                                                  AK
                                                   MC




                                                                                                       SupP                             col7≪1   col3
                                                                                           k7

                                                                                                          k7                 k8
                #SB7          #MC7                 MC
                                                                  AK
                        SB                                                                                          S   <<   (−5 , − 0 )
                                           (−0     , −0    )(−0   , −0    )
                        SR
                                                                  AK
                                                   MC
                                                                                                                S




                                                                                           k8


                #SB8          #MC8
                                                                                                       SupP                                      col3
                                                   MC
                                                                  AK
                        SB
                                           (−0     , −0    )(−0   , −0    )                               k9                 k10
                        SR
                                                                  AK
                                                   MC
                                                                                                                             (−0 , − 0 )


                                                                                                         (b) Key Schedule

                                                           T                               k̃9   k−1


                #SB9          #MC9
                        SB
BiDir                                      Match
                                                          #SB0
                        SR
                        −−→
                        End   Match +1




        Config:    • (−
                      →   ←
                          −) = (42
                      ι , ι              , 1   )
                                                      −
                                                      → ←   − →←
                                                   • (db , dr , m ) = (1      , 1   58 )
                                                                                    , 1


                                         (a) Encryption States


                Fig. 26: A conﬁguration of MITM attack against 10-Round AES-256 hashing mode
                (facilitated to converting to a collision attack)
F    Conversion of the Attacks on OT to Pseudo-Preimage
     Attacks on Grøstl
The attack procedures presented in the main body are on the OT of Grøstl.
They can be converted into pseudo-preimage attacks on Grøstl combining with
similar attack procedures on the P (Hi ) ⊕ Hi of the CF using the conversion
method in [34]. In [34], the psedudo preimage attack, i.e., ﬁnding (H, M ) such
that X = P (H ⊕ M ) ⊕ H ⊕ Q(M ) and T runcn (P (X) ⊕ X) = T for a given T , is
turn into solving a three-sum problem X1 ⊕ X2 ⊕ X3 = 0, where X1 = P (H ′ ) ⊕
H ′ ⊕ Q(M ) ⊕ M , X2 = Q(M ) ⊕ M , X3 = P (H ′ ) ⊕ H ′ while H ′ = H ⊕ M and
X1 satisﬁes T runcn (P (X1 ) ⊕ X1 ) = T . A procedure similar to the generalized
birthday attack was used in [34] and is as follows (refer to Fig. 27).

                         X3                   L       X2                  L   X1
                          P (H 0 )⊕H 0                 Q(M )⊕M                 X   = 0




                 2x3 ×     b   2n−b               2x2 ×        2n    2x1 ×    2n



                               L3                                             L1



                                                    2x1 +x2 −b × b   2n−b

                               Zero


                                                                     L2
                               Unknown




                                      2x1 +x2 +x3 −2n ×        2n




    Fig. 27: Outline for pseudo-preimage attack on the Grøstl hash function [34]




 1. Find 2x1 preimages X1 given the target T of the OT (use the MITM proce-
    dure on OT) and store in a lookup table L1 .
 2. Choose 2x2 random M with correct padding and calculate X2 = Q(M ) ⊕ M .
    Find partial matches on the leftmost b bits between 2x2 X2 ’s and 2x1 X1 ’s
    in L1 , and store the partial matches (X1 ⊕ X2 , M ) in a lookup table L2 , of
    which the size is expected to be 2x1 +x2 −b .
 3. Find 2x3 H ′ such that the leftmost b bits of X3 are all zero (use the MITM
    procedure on P (H ′ )⊕H ′ of the CF) , where X3 = P (H ′ )⊕H ′ . Store (X3 , H ′ )
    in a lookup table L3 .
 4. Find full matches (2n bits) between the 2x1 +x2 −b X1 ⊕ X2 ’s in L2 and the
    2x3 X3 ’s in L3 , retrieve the corresponding M and H ′ , output (H ′ ⊕ M, M ).

Essentially, the b bits for partial matching can locate at any positions in the state
instead of the leftmost (noted in [34]); Further, they can be any ﬁxed b-bit linear


                                                          59
relations on ℓ bits for ℓ ≥ b, which restrict the values of ℓ bits to a subspace of
dimension ℓ − b, instead of b zero’s (this is not used in [34]).
    Let the complexity of ﬁnding one 2n-bit X1 given the n-bit target T be
2C1 (2n,n) . Let the complexity of ﬁnding one 2n-bit H ′ given the b-bit restriction
on P (H ′ ) ⊕ H ′ be 2C2 (2n,b) . Then, the complexity of the above procedure was
approximated in [34] as (after removing some constant factors)

                     2x1 +C1 (2n,n) + 2x2 + 2x1 +x2 −b + 2x3 +C2 (2n,b) .
                                                               −
                                                               → ←   − →←∗
Suppose the conﬁguration for attacking P (H ′ )⊕H ′ be ( db ∗ , dr ∗ , m ) (in bytes),
                                                           →←∗                →←∗
when the target is of b-bit, the degree of matching m (b) = min( m , ⌊b/c⌋).
                                 {        →∗ ←
                                          −    −∗ →← ∗                       −
                                                                             → ←     −
                                   2b−min(db ,dr , m (b))·c b >= 2 · min( db ∗ , dr ∗ ) · c
The complexity 2C2 (2n,b) =                   →←∗                         −
                                                                          → ←     −          ,
                                   2b−min(b/2, m (b)·c)       b < 2 · min( db ∗ , dr ∗ ) · c
where, b/2 in the second case is because one cannot fully use all the freedom
degrees in that case.
     However, we note that it is possible for Step 3 that, ﬁnding 2x3 H ′ requires
much less computations than 2x3 +C2 (2n,b) . This is because one may ﬁnd a large
number of H ′ within a single MITM procedure when the degree of freedom is
large and the number b of bits for partial preimage attack is small. For example,
for attacking 6-round P (H ′ ) ⊕ H ′ of Grøstl-256 using conﬁguration Fig. 6 with
 −
 → ←     − →←∗
( db ∗ , dr ∗ , m ) = (3, 3, 3), when b = 3 × 8, with 23×8 computations, one can ﬁnd
23×8 H ′ partially matching on b bits. Thus, the amortized complexity of ﬁnding
one H ′ is 20 . When x3 is larger than b, the complexity of the above Step 3 is 2x3 .
Thus, unlike in [34] that limits the lower bound of 2C2 (2n,b) to a birthday bound
2b/2 , we use C2 (2n, b) to represent the amortized complexity of ﬁnding one H ′ ,
and the complexity is then

                    2x1 +C1 (2n,n) + 2x2 + 2x3 +C2 (2n,b) + 2x1 +x2 −b .

Because x1 + x2 + x3 = 2n, the complexity is

                2x1 +C1 (2n,n) + 2x2 + 2x3 +C2 (2n,b) + 22n−(x3 +b) .
               −
               → ←   − →←∗
When b ≤ min( db ∗ , dr ∗ , m ) · c, C2 (2n, b) = 0 for x3 ≥ b, that is, the amor-
                                                                   −
                                                                   → ←− →←∗
tized complexity for ﬁnding each H ′ is one. When b ≥ min( db ∗ , dr ∗ , m ) · c,
                      →∗ ←
                      −  −∗ →←∗
C2 (2n, b) = 2b−min(db ,dr , m )·c , increasing b has the same eﬀect as increasing
                                            −
                                            → ← − →←∗
x3 . Thus, we can always take b = min( db ∗ , dr ∗ , m ) · c and adjusting x3 .
                    −
                    → ← − →←    ∗
     Denote min( db ∗ , dr ∗ , m ) · c by G2 meaning the gain over bruteforce attack
                                          ←− −→ −  → ←− →← −→ ←− ←→
on P (H ′ ) ⊕ H ′ . Further, denote min(dr − dgb , db − dgr , m −dgb − dgr − dgbr ) · c
by G1 meaning the gain over bruteforce attack on the OT, which equals n −
C1 (2n, n). Then, the complexity is

                          2x1 +n−G1 + 2x2 + 2x3 + 2x1 +x2 −G2 .
   In this formula, there are three parameters x1 , x2 , x3 with x1 + x2 + x3 = 2n.
Given G1 and G2 , one can ﬁnd the best complexity by adjusting x1 , x2 , and x3 .


                                             60
The order of magnitude of the total complexity is
     {
         n − 3 , with (x1 = 3 , x2 = n − 3 , x3 = n − G31 )
           G1            2G1           G1
                                                                                       if G2 ≥ 2G 1
                                                                                                    .
CT ≈                                                                                            3
         n − G22 , with (x1 = G21 + G42 , x2 = n − G21 + G42 , x3 = n − G22 )                     2G1
                                                                                       else G2 < 3 .
                                                                                               (19)
The order of magnitude of the memory complexity is
                           {
                               n + G31 − G2 , i.e., x1 + x2 − b,      if G2 ≥ 2G 1
                                                                                   .
                   CM ≈                                                        3
                                                                                                 (20)
                               n − G22 , i.e., x3 ,                           2G1
                                                                      if G2 < 3 .

    Concrete values of parameters for obtaining the best complexity for various attacks
are summarized in Table 3.



Table 3: Concrete parameters for complexity of pseudo-preimage attacks on Grøstl
(with recomputed complexities for previous works)
              #R      x1        x2     x3     G1        G2    G        CT      CM             Ref.

Grøstl-256    5/10    32        240    240    48        40    16       240    232            † [34]
Grøstl-256    5/10    42.67     234.67 234.67 64        64    21.33    234.67 213.33     ∗ [24, 36]
Grøstl-256    5/10    48        232    232    72        72    24       232    208      Fig. 14, 15
Grøstl-256    6/10    12        248    252    16        8     4        252    252        ∗ [24, 36]
Grøstl-256    6/10    21.33     245.33 245.33 32        24    10.67    245.33 242.67     Fig. 5, 6
Grøstl-512    7/14    64        480    480    96        104   32       480     440     Fig. 16, 17
Grøstl-512     8/14     12     508    508      16      8      4       508     508             † [34]
Grøstl-512     8/14     32     488    504      40      16     8       504     504             † [36]
Grøstl-512     8/14     28     496    500      40      24     12      500     500          Fig. 7, 8
           ←− −→ −     → ←− →← −→ ←− ←−→
G1 = min(dr − dgb , db − dgr , m −dgb − dgr − dgbr ) · c meaning the gain over bruteforce attack
on the OT.
           → ←
           −     − →←∗
G2 = min(db ∗ , dr ∗ , m ) · c meaning the gain over bruteforce attack on P (H ′ ) ⊕ H ′ .
G: the gain over bruteforce attack on CF + OT (pseudo-preimage attack).
C: the order of the total complexity.
† The presented parameters for the attacks in [34] and [36] are recomputed by removing constant
factors (e.g., the cost CT L for lookup table is replaced by 1) and replacing C2 (2n, b) that is lower
bounded by b/2 in [34] with C2 (2n, b) that can be 20 considering the amortized complexity. Thus,
all complexities in this table are computed follow the same way.
The claimed complexity of the 5-round attack on Grøstl-256 in [34] is 2244.85 , with x1 = 36.93,
x2 = 244.93, x3 = 230.13, C1 (2n, n) = 206, b = 31.
The claimed complexity of the 8-round attack on Grøstl-512 in [34] is 2507.32 , with x1 = 10.50,
x2 = 506.50, x3 = 507.00, C1 (2n, n) = 495, b = 0.
∗ The 5- and 6-round attacks in [24] are on the OT of Grøstl-256. To convert to pseudo-preimage,
we used the results for the case with no truncation in [24] . However, for the 6-round attack, in
which guessing are required, it cannot be directly used. Thus, we combined the attack on OT
in [24] with the best previous attack on the CF in [36].




                                                   61
